NINETEENTH BOOK.


Announced by the low barking of a little dog which ran out to meet us,
we were cordially received at the door by an elderly but active female.
She apologised for the absence of the Pater, who had gone to Milan,
but was expected home that evening; and immediately, without any more
words, set to work to provide for our comfort and wants. We were shown
into a warm and spacious room, where bread, cheese, and some passable
wine were set before us, with the promise of a more substantial meal
for our supper. The surprise of the day was now talked over, and my
friend was not a little proud that all had gone off so well, and that
we had passed a day the impressions of which neither poetry nor prose
could ever reproduce.

At length with the twilight, which did not here come on till late, the
venerable father entered the room, greeted his guests with dignity
but in a friendly and cordial manner, and in a few words ordered the
cook to pay all possible attention to our wishes. When we expressed
the wonder we could not repress, that he could like to pass his life
up here, in the midst of such a perfect wilderness, out of the reach
of all society, he assured us that society was never wanting, as our
own welcome visit might testify. A lively trade, he told us, was kept
up between Italy and Germany. This continual traffic brought him into
relation with the first mercantile houses. He often went down to Milan,
and also to Lucerne, though not so frequently, from which place,
however, the houses which had charge of the posting on the main route,
frequently sent young people to him, who, here at the point of passage
between the two countries, required to be made acquainted with all the
circumstances and events connected with such affairs.

Amid such varied conversation the evening passed away, and we slept a
quiet night on somewhat short sleeping-places, fastened to the wall,
and more like shelves than bedsteads.

[Side-note: Distant View of Italy.]

Rising early, I soon found myself under the open sky, but in a narrow
space surrounded by tall mountain-tops. I sat down upon the foot-path
which led to Italy, and attempted, after the manner of dilettanti,
to draw what could not be drawn, still less make a picture, namely,
the nearest mountain-tops, whose sides, with their white furrows and
black ridges, were gradually made visible by the melting of the snow.
Nevertheless, that fruitless effort has impressed the image indelibly
on my memory.

My companion stepped briskly up to me, and began: "What say you of the
story of our spiritual host, last evening? Have not you as well as
myself, felt a desire to descend from this dragon's height into those
charming regions below? A ramble through these gorges must be glorious
and not very toilsome; and when it ends with Bellinzona, what a
pleasure that must be! The words of the good father have again brought
a living image before my soul of the isles of the Lago Maggiore. We
have heard and seen so much of them since Keyssler's travels, that I
cannot resist the temptation."

"Is it not so with you too?" he resumed; "you are sitting on exactly
the right spot; I stood there once, but had not the courage to jump
down. You can go on without ceremony, wait for me at Airolo, I will
follow with the courier when I have taken leave of the good father and
settled everything."

"Such an enterprise," I replied, "so suddenly undertaken, does not suit
me." "What's the use of deliberating so much?" cried he; "we have money
enough to get to Milan, where we shall find credit; through our fair, I
know more than one mercantile friend there." He grew still more urgent.
"Go!" said I, "and make all ready for the departure, then we will
decide."

In such moments it seems to me as if a man feels no resolution in
himself, but is rather governed and determined by earlier impressions.
Lombardy and Italy lay before me, altogether foreign land; while
Germany, as a well-known dear home, full of friendly, domestic scenes,
and where, let me confess it,--was that which had so long entirely
enchained me, and on which my existence was centred, remained even
now the most indispensable element, beyond the limits of which I felt
afraid to step. A little golden heart, which in my happiest hours, I
had received from her, still hung love-warmed about my neck, suspended
by the same ribbon to which she had tied it. Snatching it from my
bosom, I loaded it with kisses. This incident gave rise to a poem,
which I here insert:--

    Round my neck, suspended, as a token
    Of those joys, that swiftly pass'd away,
    Art thou here that thou may'st lengthen love's short day,
    Still binding, when the bond of souls is broken?

    Lili, from thee I fly; yet I am doom'd to feel
    Thy fetters still,
    Though to strange vales and mountains I depart,
    Yes, Lili's heart must yet remain
    Attached to _my_ fond heart.

    Thus the bird, snapping his string in twain,
    Seeks his wood,--his own,
    Still a mark of bondage bearing,
    Of that string a fragment wearing.
    The old--the free-born bird--he cannot be again,
    When once a master he has known.

Seeing my Mend with the guide, who carried our knapsack, come storming
up the heights, I rose hastily and removed from the precipice, where
I had been watching his return, lest he should drag me down into the
abyss with him. I also saluted the pious father, and turned, without
saying a word, to the path by which we had come. My friend followed
me, somewhat hesitating, and in spite of his love and attachment to
me, kept for a long time at a distance behind, till at last a glorious
waterfall brought us again together for the rest of our journey, and
what had been once decided, was from henceforth looked upon as the
wisest and the best.

Of our descent I will only remark that we now found the snow-bridge,
over which we had securely travelled with a heavy-laden train a
few days before, all fallen in, and that now, as we had to make a
circuit round the opened thicket, we were filled with astonishment
and admiration by the colossal fragments of that piece of natural
architecture.

My friend could not quite get over his disappointment at not returning
into Italy; very likely he had thought of the plan some time before,
and with amiable cunning had hoped to surprise me on the spot. On this
account our return did not proceed so merrily as our advance; but I was
occupied all the more constantly on my silent route, with trying to
fix, at least in its more comprehensible and characteristic details,
that sense of the sublime and vast, which, as time advances, usually
grows contracted in our minds.

[Side-note: Küssnacht--Tell.]

Not without many both new and renewed emotions and reflections did we
pass over the remarkable heights about the Vierwaldstätter Lake, on
our way to Küssnacht, where having landed and pursued our ramble, we
had to greet Tell's chapel, which lay on our route, and to reflect
upon that assassination which, in the eyes of the whole world, is so
heroical, patriotic, and glorious. So, too, we sailed over the Zuger
Lake, which we had seen in the distance as we looked down from Rigi.
In Zug, I only remember some painted glass, inserted into the casement
of a chamber of the inn, not large to be sure, but excellent in its
way. Our route then led over the Albis into the Sihl valley, where, by
visiting a young Hanoverian, Von Lindau, who delighted to live there
in solitude, we sought to mitigate the vexation which he had felt some
time before in Zurich, at our declining the offer of his company not
in the most friendly or polite manner. The jealous friendship of the
worthy Passavant was really the reason of my rejecting the truly dear,
but inconvenient presence of another.

But before we descend again from these glorious heights, to the lake
and to the pleasantly situated city, I must make one more remark
upon my attempts to carry away some idea, of the country by drawing
and sketching. A habit from youth upward of viewing a landscape as
a picture, led me, whenever I observed any picturesque spot in the
natural scenery, to try and fix it, and so to preserve a sure memorial
of such moments. But having hitherto only exercised myself on confined
scenes, I soon felt the incompetency of my art for such a world.

The haste I was in at once compelled me to have recourse to a singular
expedient: scarcely had I noticed an interesting object, and with
light and very sketchy strokes drawn the outlines on the paper, than
I noted down, in words, the particular objects which I had no time to
catch and fill up with the pencil, and, by this means, made the scenes
so thoroughly present to my mind, that every locality, whenever I
afterwards wanted it for a poem or a story, floated at once before me
and was entirely at my command.

On returning to Zurich, I found the Stolbergs were gone; their stay in
this city had been cut short in a singular manner.

It must be confessed that travellers upon removing to a distance from
the restraints of home, are only too apt to think they are stepping
not only into an unknown, but into a perfectly free world; a delusion
which it was the more easy to indulge in at this time, as there was
not as yet any passports to be examined by the police, or any tolls
and suchlike checks and hindrances on the liberty of travellers, to
remind men that abroad they are subject to still worse and more painful
restraints than at home.

If the reader will only bear in mind this decided tendency to realize
the freedom of nature, he will be able to pardon the young spirits who
regarded Switzerland as the very place in which to "Idyllize" the fresh
independence of youth. The tender poems of Gessner, as well as his
charming sketches, seemed decidedly to justify this expectation.

In fact, bathing in wide waters, seems to be one of the best
qualifications for expressing such poetic talents. Upon our journey
thus far, such natural exercises had not seemed exactly suitable to
modern customs, and we had, in some degree, abstained from them. But,
in Switzerland, the sight of the cool stream,--flowing, running,
rushing, then gathering on the plain, and gradually spreading out to a
lake,--presented a temptation that was not to be resisted. I can not
deny that I joined my companions in bathing in the clear lake, but we
chose a spot far enough, as we supposed, from all human eyes. But naked
bodies shine a good way, and whoever chanced to see us doubtless took
offence.

[Side-note: Anecdote of the Stolbergs.]

The good innocent youths who thought it nowise shocking to see
themselves half naked, like poetic shepherds, or entirely naked, like
heathen deities, were admonished by their friends to leave off all
such practices. They were given to understand that they were living
not in primeval nature, but in a land where it was esteemed good and
salutary to adhere to the old institutions and customs which had
been handed down from the middle ages. They were not disinclined to
acknowledge the propriety of all this, especially as the appeal was
made to the middle ages, which, to them, seemed venerable as a second
nature. Accordingly, they left the more public lake shores, but when
in their walks through the mountains, they fell in with the clear,
rustling, refreshing streams, it seemed to them impossible, in the
middle of July, to abstain from the refreshing exercise. Thus, on
their wide sweeping walks, they came also to the shady vale, where the
Sihl, streaming behind the Albis, shoots down to empty itself into
the Limmat below Zurich. Far from every habitation, and even from all
trodden foot-paths, they thought there could be no objection here to
their throwing off their clothes and boldly meeting the foaming waves.
This was not indeed done without a shriek, without a wild shout of joy,
excited partly by the chill and partly by the satisfaction, by which
they thought to consecrate these gloomy, wooded rocks into an Idyllic
scene.

But, whether persons previously ill-disposed had crept after them,
or whether this poetic tumult called forth adversaries even in the
solitude, cannot be determined. Suffice it to say, stone after stone
was thrown at them from the motionless bushes above, whether by one or
more, whether accidentally or purposely, they could not tell; however,
they thought it wisest to renounce the quickening element and look
after their clothes.

No one got hit; they sustained no injury but the moral one of surprise
and chagrin, and full of young life as they were, they easily shook off
the recollection of this awkward affair.

But the most disagreeable consequences fell upon Lavater, who was
blamed for having given so friendly a welcome to such saucy youths, as
even to have arranged walks with them, and otherwise to shew attention
to persons whose wild, unbridled, unchristian, and even heathenish
habits, had caused so much scandal to a moral and well-regulated
neighbourhood.

Our clever friend, however, who well knew how to smooth over such
unpleasant occurrences, contrived to hush up this one also, and after
the departure of these meteoric travellers, we found, on our return,
peace and quiet restored.

In the fragment of Werther's travels, which has lately been reprinted
in the sixteenth volume of my works, I have attempted to describe this
contrast of the commendable order and legal restraint of Switzerland,
with that life of nature which youth in its delusions so loudly
demands. But, as people generally are apt to take all that the poet
advances without reserve for his decided opinions, or even didactic
censure, so the Swiss were very much offended at the comparison, and
I, therefore, dropped the intended continuation, which was to have
represented, more or less in detail, Werther's progress up to the
epoch of his sorrows, and which, therefore, would certainly have been
interesting to those who wish to study mankind.

Arrived at Zurich, I devoted my time almost exclusively to Lavater,
whose hospitality I again made use of. The Physiognomy, with all its
portraits and monstrous caricatures, weighed heavily and with an
ever-increasing load on the shoulders of the worthy man. We arranged
all as well as we could under the circumstances, and I promised him, on
my return home, to continue my assistance.

I was led to give this promise by a certain youthful unlimited
confidence in my own quickness of comprehension, and still more by a
feeling of my readiness of adaptation to any subject; for, in truth,
the way in which Lavater dissected physiognomies was not at all in my
vein. The impression which at our first meeting, he had made upon me,
determined, in some degree, my relation to him; although a general wish
to oblige which was always strong, joined to the light-heartedness of
youth, had a great share in all my actions by causing me to see things
in a certain twilight atmosphere.

Lavater's mind was altogether an imposing one; in his society it
was impossible to resist his decided influence, and I had no choice
but to submit to it at once and set to work observing foreheads and
noses, eyes and mouths, in detail, and weighing their relations and
proportions. My fellow observer did this from necessity, as he had to
give a perfect account of what he himself had discerned so clearly; but
to me it always seemed like a trick, a piece of espionage, to attempt
to analyse a man into his elements before his face, and so to get upon
the track of his hidden moral peculiarities. I had more pleasure in
listening to his conversation, in which he unveiled himself at will.
And yet, I must confess, I always felt a degree of constraint in
Lavater's presence; for, while by his art of physiognomy, he possessed
himself of our peculiarities, he also made himself, by conversation,
master of our thoughts, which, with a little sagacity, he would easily
guess from our variety of phrases.

He who feels a pregnant synthesis in himself, has peculiarly a right to
analyse, since by the outward particulars he tests and legitimizes his
inward whole. How Lavater managed in such cases, a single example will
suffice to show.

[Side-note: Lavater--His Character and Works.]

On Sundays, after the sermon, it was his duty, as an ecclesiastic,
to hold the short-handled, velvet, alms-bag before each one who went
out, and to bless as he received the pious gift. Now, on a certain
Sunday he proposed to himself, without looking at the several persons
as they dropped in their offerings, to observe only their hands, and
by them, silently, to judge of the forms of their owner. Not only the
shape of the finger, but its peculiar action in dropping the gift,
was attentively noted by him, and he had much to communicate to me on
the conclusions he had formed. How instructive and exciting must such
conversations have been to one, who also was seeking to qualify himself
for a painter of men!

Often in my after life had I occasion to think of Lavater, who was
one of the best and worthiest men that I ever formed so intimate
a relation with. These notices of him that I have introduced in
this work were accordingly written at various times. Following our
divergent tendencies, we gradually became strangers to each other,
and yet I never could bring myself to part with the favorable idea
which his worth had left upon my mind. In thought I often brought him
before me, and thus arose these leaves, which, as they were written
without reference to and independently of each other, may contain some
repetitions, but, it is hoped, no contradictions.

       *       *       *       *       *

By his cast of mind, Lavater was a decided realist, and knew of nothing
ideal except in a moral form; by keeping this remark steadily in mind,
you will most readily understand this rare and singular man.

His _Prospects of Eternity_ look merely for a continuance of the
present state of existence, under easier conditions than those which we
have now to endure. His _Physiognomy_ rests on the conviction that the
sensible corresponds throughout with the spiritual, and is not only an
evidence of it, but indeed its representative.

The ideals of art found little favor with him, because with his sharp
look he saw too clearly the impossibility of such conceptions ever
being embodied in a living organization, and he therefore banished them
into the realm of fable, and even of monstrosity.

His incessant demand for a realization of the ideal gained him the
reputation of a visionary, although he maintained and felt convinced
that no man insisted more strongly on the actual than he did;
accordingly, he never could detect the error in his mode of thinking
and acting.

Seldom has there been a man who strove more passionately than he did
for public recognition, and thus he was particularly fitted for a
teacher; but if all his labors tended to the intellectual and moral
improvement of others, this was by no means their ultimate aim.

To realize the character of Christ was what he had most at heart;
hence that almost insane zeal of his to have pictures of Christ drawn,
copied, moulded, one after another; none of which, however, as to be
expected, ever satisfied him.

His writings are hard to understand, even now, for it is far from easy
to penetrate into his precise meaning. No one ever wrote so much of
the times, and for the times, as Lavater; his writings are veritable
journals, which in an especial manner require to be explained by the
history of the day; they, moreover, are written in the language of a
coterie, which one must first acquaint oneself with, before we can
hold communion with them, otherwise many things will appear stupid and
absurd even to the most intelligent reader. Indeed, objections enough
of the kind have been made against this author, both in his lifetime
and since.

Thus, for example, with our rage for dramatizing and representing under
this form all that struck us, and caring for no other, we once so
warmed his brain with a dramatic ardour, that, in his _Pontius Pilate_,
he labored very hard to show that there is no more dramatic work than
the Bible; and, especially, that the history of Christ's Passion must
be regarded as the drama of all dramas.

In this chapter, and indeed throughout the work, Lavater appears
greatly to resemble Father Abraham of Santa Clara; for into this manner
every richly gifted mind necessarily falls who wishes to work upon his
contemporaries. He must acquaint himself with existing tendencies and
passions, with the speech and terminology of the day, and adapt them
to his ends, in order to approach the mass whom he seeks to influence.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Side-note: Lavater--His Character and Works.]

Since Lavater took Christ literally,--as described by the Scriptures,
and by most commentators,--he let this representation serve so far
for the supplement of his own being, that he ideally incorporated the
God-man into his own individual humanity, until he finally was able to
imagine himself melted into one and united with him, and, indeed, to
have become the same person.

This decidedly literal faith had also worked in him a perfect
conviction that miracles can be wrought to-day as well as heretofore.
Accordingly, since in some important and trying emergencies of his
earlier days, he had by means of earnest and indeed violent prayer,
succeeded in procuring an instantaneous and favorable turn of the
impending calamity, no mere cold objections of the reasoning intellect
would make him for a moment waver in this faith. Penetrated, moreover,
by the idea of the greatness and excellence of Humanity as restored by
Christ, and through Him destined to a blissful immortality, but, at
the same time, fully sensible of the manifold requisitions of man's
heart and mind, and of his insatiable yearnings after knowledge, and,
moreover, feeling in himself that desire of expanding himself into the
infinite to which the starry heavens seem so sensibly to invite us, he
wrote under these feelings Iris "_Prospects of Eternity_," which must
have appeared a very strange book indeed to the greater part of his
contemporaries.

All this striving, however, all wishes, all undertakings, were
overborne by the genius for physiognomy, which nature had bestowed upon
him. For, as the touchstone, by its blackness and peculiar roughness of
surface, is eminently fitted to distinguish between the metals which
are applied to it; so that pure idea of humanity, which Lavater carried
within himself, and that sharp yet delicate gift of observation, which
at first he exercised from natural impulse occasionally only and
accidentally, but afterwards with deliberate reflection and regularly,
qualified him in the highest degree to note the peculiarities of
individual men, and to understand, distinguish, and express them.

Every talent which rests on a decided natural gift, seems from our
inability to subordinate either it or its operations to any idea to
have something of magic about it. And, in truth, Lavater's insight into
the characters of individuals surpassed all conception; one was utterly
amazed at his remarks, when in confidence we were talking of this or
that person; nay, it was frightful to live near a man who clearly
discerned the nicest limits by which nature had been pleased to modify
and distinguish our various personalities.

Every one is apt to believe that what he possesses himself may be
communicated to others; and so Lavater was not content to make use of
this great gift for himself alone, but insisted that it might be found
and called forth in others, nay that it might even be imparted to the
great mass. The many dull and malicious misinterpretations, the stupid
jests in abundance, and detracting railleries, this striking doctrine
gave rise to, may still be remembered by some men; however, it must be
owned that the worthy man himself was not altogether without blame in
the matter. For though a high moral sense preserved the unity of his
inner being, yet, with his manifold labors, he was unable to attain
to outward unity, since he did not possess the slightest capacity for
philosophical method, nor for artistic talent.

He was neither Thinker nor Poet; indeed, not even an orator, in the
proper sense of the term. Utterly unable to take a comprehensive
and methodical view, he nevertheless formed an unerring judgment of
individual cases and these he noted down boldly side by side. His great
work on Physiognomy is a striking proof and illustration of this. In
himself, the idea of the moral or of the sensual man might form a
whole; but out of himself he could not represent this idea, except
practically by individual cases, in the same way as he himself had
apprehended them in life.

That very work sadly shows us how in the commonest matter of experience
so sharp-sighted a man, may go groping about him. For after spending
an immense sum and employing every artist and botcher living, he
procured at last drawings and engravings, which were so far without
character, that he is obliged in his work to say after each one that
it is more or less a failure, unmeaning and worthless. True, by this
means, he sharpened his own judgment, and the judgment of others; but
it also proves that his mental bias led him rather to heap up cases of
experience, than to draw from them any clear and sober principle. For
this reason he never could come to results, though I often pressed him
for them. What in later life he confided as such to his friends, were
none to me; for they consisted of nothing more than a collection of
certain lines and features, nay, warts and freckles, with which he had
seen certain moral, and frequently immoral, peculiarities associated.
There were certainly some remarks among them that surprised and
riveted your attention; but they formed no series, one thing followed
another accidentally, there was no gradual advance towards any general
deductions and no reference to any principles previously established.
And indeed there was just as little of literary method or artistic
feeling to be found in his other writings, which invariably contained
passionate and earnest expositions of his thoughts and objects, and
supplied by the most affecting and appropriate instances, what they
could not accomplish by the general conception.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Side-note: Abuse of the Term--Genius.]

The following reflections, as they refer to those circumstances, may be
aptly introduced here.

No one willingly concedes superiority to another, so long as he can
in any way deny it. Natural gifts of every kind can the least be
denied, and yet by the common mode of speaking in those times, genius
was ascribed to the poet alone. But another world seemed all at once
to rise up; genius was looked for in the physician, in the general,
in the statesman, and before long, in all men, who thought to make
themselves eminent either in theory or practice. Zimmerman, especially,
had advanced these claims. Lavater, by his views of Physiognomy, was
compelled to assume a more general distribution of mental gifts by
nature; the word genius became a universal symbol, and because men
heard it uttered so often, they thought that what was meant by it, was
habitually at hand. But then, since every one felt himself justified
in demanding genius of others, he finally believed that he also must
possess it himself. The time was yet far distant when it could be
affirmed, that genius is that power of man which by its deeds and
actions gives laws and rules. At this time it was thought to manifest
itself only, by overstepping existing laws, breaking established
rules, and declaring itself above all restraint. It was, therefore,
an easy thing to be a genius, and nothing was more natural than that
extravagance both of word and deed should provoke all orderly men to
oppose themselves to such a monster.

When anybody rushed into the world on foot, without exactly knowing why
or whither, it was called a pass of genius; and when any one undertook
an aimless and useless absurdity, it was a stroke of genius. Young
men, of vivacious and true talents, too often lost themselves in the
limitless; and then older men of understanding, wanting perhaps in
talent and in soul, found a most malicious gratification in exposing to
the public gaze, their manifold and ludicrous miscarriages.

For my part, in the development and the expression of my own ideas,
I perhaps experienced far more hindrance and checks from the false
co-operation and interference of the like-minded, than by the
opposition of those whose turn of mind was directly contrary to my own.

With a strange rapidity, words, epithets, and phrases, which have once
been cleverly employed to disparage the highest intellectual gifts,
spread by a sort of mechanical repetition among the multitude, and in
a short time they are to be heard everywhere, even in common life, and
in the mouths of the most uneducated; indeed before long they even
creep into dictionaries. In this way the word genius had suffered so
much from misrepresentation, that it was almost desired to banish it
entirely from the German language.

And so the Germans, with whom the common voice is more apt to prevail
than with other nations, would perhaps have sacrificed the fairest
flower of speech, the word which, though apparently foreign, really
belongs to every people, had not the sense for what is highest and best
in man, been happily restored and solidly established by a profounder
philosophy.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the preceding pages mention has been frequently made of the youthful
times of two men, whose memory will never hide from the history of
German literature and morals. At this period, however, we came to
know them as it were only by the errors into which they were misled
by a false maxim which prevailed among their youthful contemporaries.
Nothing, therefore, can be more proper than with due appreciation and
respect to paint their natural form, their peculiar individuality, just
as it appeared at that time, and as their immediate presence exhibited
itself to the penetrating eye of Lavater. Consequently, since the heavy
and expensive volumes of the great work on Physiognomy are probably
accessible to a few only of our readers, I have no scruple in inserting
here the remarkable passages of that work, which refer to both the
Stolbergs, in the second part and its thirtieth fragment, page 224:

[Side-note: Lavater's Sketch of the Stolbergs.]

"The young men, whose portraits and profiles we have here before us,
are the first men who ever sat and stood to me for physiognomical
description, as another would sit to a painter for his portrait.

"I knew them before, the noble ones--and I made the first attempt, in
accordance with nature and with all my previous knowledge, to observe
and to describe their character.

"Here is the description of the whole man.--

FIRST, OF THE YOUNGER.

"See the blooming youth of 25! the lightly-floating, buoyant, elastic
creature! it does not lie; it does not stand; it does not lean; it does
not fly; it floats or swims. Too full of life, to rest; too supple to
stand firm; too heavy and too weak, to fly.

"A floating thing, then, which does not touch the earth! In its whole
contour not a single slack line; but on the other hand no straight one,
no tense one, none firmly arched or stiffly curved; no sharp entering
angles, no rock-like projection of the brow; no hardness; no stiffness;
no defiant roughness; no threatening insolence; no iron will--all
is elastic, winning, but nothing iron; no stedfast and searching
profundity; no slow reflection, or prudent thoughtfulness; nowhere the
reasoner with the scales held firmly in the one hand, and the sword in
the other; and yet not the least formality in look or judgment! but
still the most perfect straight-forwardness of intellect, or rather
the most immaculate sentiment of truth! Always the inward feeler,
never the deep thinker; never the discoverer, the testing unfolder of
truth so quickly seen, so quickly known, so quickly loved, and quickly
grasped.... Perpetual soarer, a seer; idealizer; beautifier;--that
gives a shape and form, to all his ideas! Ever the half-intoxicated
poet, seeing only what he will see;--not the sorrowfully languishing;
not the sternly crushing; but the lofty, noble, powerful! who with
'thirst for the sun' (_Sonnendurst_), hovers to and fro in the regions
of air, strives aloft, and again--_sinks_ not to earth! but throws
himself headlong to earth, bather in the floods of the 'Rock-stream'
(_Felsenstrom_), and cradles himself 'in the thunder of the echoing
rocks around' (_Im Donner der hallenden Felsen umher_). His glance--not
the fire-glance of the eagle! His brow and nose--not the courage of the
lion! his breast--not the stedfastness of the steed that neighs for
battle! In the whole, however, there is much of the tearing activity of
the elephant....

"The projecting upper lip slightly drawn up towards the over-hanging
nose, which is neither sharply cut, nor angular, evinces, with such a
closing of the mouth, much taste and sensibility; while the lower part
of the face bespeaks much sensuality, indolence, and thoughtlessness.
The whole outline of the profile shows openness, honesty, humanity,
but at the same tune a liability to be led astray, and a high degree
of that good-hearted indiscretion, which injures no one but himself.
The middle line of the mouth bespeaks in its repose, a downright,
planless, weak, good-natured disposition; when in motion, a tender,
finely-feeling, exceedingly susceptible, benevolent, noble man. In the
arch of the eyelids, and in the glance of the eyes, there sits not
Homer, but the deepest, most thorough, and most quick feeling, and
comprehension of Homer; not the epic, but the lyric poet; genius, which
fuses, moulds, creates, glorifies, hovers, transforms all into a heroic
form--which deifies all. The half-closed eyelids, from such an arch,
indicate the keenly sensitive poet, rather than the slowly laboring
artist, who creates after a plan; the whimsical rather than the severe.
The full face of the youth is much more taking and attractive, than
the somewhat too loose, too protracted half-face; the fore-part of the
face in its slightest motion, tells of a highly sensitive, thoughtful,
inventive, untaught, inward goodness, of a softly tremulous,
wrong-abhorring love of liberty--an eager vivacity. It cannot conceal
from the commonest observer the slightest impression which it receives
for the moment, or adopts for ever. Every object, which nearly concerns
or interests him, drives the blood into the cheeks and nose; where
honor is concerned, the most maidenly blush of shame spreads like
lightning over the delicately sensitive skin.

[Side-note: Lavater's Sketch of the Stolbergs.]

"The complexion is not the pale one of all-creating, all-consuming
genius; not the wildly glowing one of the contemptuous destroyer;
not the milk-white one of the blond; not the olive one of the strong
and hardy; not the brownish one of the slowly plodding peasant; but
the white, the red, and the violet, running one into another, and so
expressively, and so happily, blended together like the strength and
weakness of the whole character. The soul of the whole and of each
single feature is freedom, and elastic activity, which springs forth
easily and is as easily repulsed. The whole fore-face and the way
the head is carried, promise magnanimity and upright cheerfulness.
Incorruptible sensibility, delicacy of taste, purity of mind, goodness
and nobleness of soul, active power, a feeling of strength and of
weakness, shine out so transparently through the whole face, that what
were otherwise a lively self-complacency dissolves itself into a noble
modesty, and most artlessly and unconstrainedly the natural pride and
vanity of youth melt with the loveliness of twilight into the easy
majesty of the whole man. The whitish hair, the length and awkwardness
of form, the softness and lightness of step, the hesitating gait, the
flatness of the breast, the fair unfurrowed brow, and various other
features spread over the whole man a certain feminine air, by which
the inward quickness of action is moderated, and every intentional
offence and every meanness made for ever impossible to the heart; but
at the same time clearly evincing that the spirited and fiery poet,
with all his unaffected thirst for freedom and for emancipation, is
neither destined to be a man of business, thoroughly persistent, who
steadily and resolutely carries out his plans, or to become immortal
in the bloody strife. And now, in conclusion, I remark, for the first
time, that I have as yet said nothing of the most striking trait--the
noble simplicity, free from all affectation! Nothing of his childlike
openness of heart! Nothing of the entire unconsciousness of his outward
nobility! Nothing of the inexpressible _bonhommie_ with which he
accepts and bears reproaches or warnings, nay, even accusations and
wrongful charges.

"But who can find an end, who will undertake to tell all that he sees
or feels in a good man, in whom there is so much pure humanity?"

DESCRIPTION OF THE ELDER STOLBERG.

"What I have said of the younger brother--how much of it may be
said also of the elder! The principal thing I have to remark is the
following:--

"This figure and this character are more compact and less diffuse
than the former. There all was longer or flatter; here all is
shorter, broader, more arched, and rounded; there all was vague; here
everything is more precise and sharply defined. So the brow; so the
nose; so the breast: more compressed, more active, less diffuse, more
of concentrated life and power! For the rest, the same amiableness
and _bonhommie!_ Not that striking openness, rather more of reserve,
but in principle, or rather in deed, the same honorable tone. The
same invincible abhorrence of injustice and baseness; the same
irreconcilable hatred of all that is called cunning and trickery; the
same unyielding opposition to tyranny and despotism; the same pure,
incorruptible sensibility to all that is noble, and great, and good;
the same need of friendship and of freedom, the same sensitiveness
and noble thirst for glory; the same catholicity of heart for all
good, wise, sincere, and energetic men, renowned or unrenowned, known
or misunderstood,--and the same light-hearted inconsiderateness. No!
not exactly the same. The face is sharper, more contracted, firmer;
has more inward, self-developing capacity for business and practical
counsels; more of enterprising spirit--which is shown especially by
the strongly prominent and fully rounded bones of the eye-sockets.
Not the all-blending, rich, pure, lofty poet's feeling--not the ease
and rapidity of the productive, power which marks the other--but yet
he is, and that in profounder depths, vivacious, upright, ardent.
Not the airy genius of light floating away in the morning red of
heaven, and fashioning huge shapes therein--but more of inward power,
though perhaps less of expression! more powerful and terrible--less
of elegance and finish; though his pencil nevertheless wants neither
coloring nor enchantment. More wit and riotous humor; droll satire;
brow, nose, look--all so downward, so over-hanging--decidedly what
it should be for original and all-enlivening wit, which does not
gather from without, but brings forth from within. Above all in this
character every trait more prominent, more angular, more aggressive,
more storming! No passive dullness, no relaxation, except in the sunken
eyes, where, as well as in the brow and nose, pleasure evidently
sits. In all besides--and even in this very brow, this concentration
of all--in this look indeed--there is an unmistakable expression of
natural, unacquired greatness; strength, impetuosity of manliness;
constancy, simplicity, precision!"

       *       *       *       *       *

After having in Darmstadt conceded to Merck the justice of his
opinions and allowed him to triumph, in his having predicted my
speedy separation from these gay companions, I found myself again in
Frankfort, well received by every one, including my father, although
the latter could not conceal his disappointment that I had not
descended by the pass to Airolo, and announced to him from Milan my
arrival in Italy. All this was expressed by his silence rather than his
words; but above all he did not show the slightest sympathy with those
wild rocks, those lakes of mist, and dragons' nests.

At last, however, by an incidental remark, by no means intended for
a reproach, he gave me to understand how little all such sights were
worth: he who has not seen Naples, he observed, has lived to no end.

[Side-note: My Meeting again with Lili.]

On my return I did not, I could not, avoid seeing Lili; the position
we maintained towards each other was tender and considerate. I was
informed that they had fully convinced her in my absence, that she must
break off her intimacy with me, and that this was the more necessary
and indeed more practicable, since by my journey and voluntary absence,
I had given a sufficiently clear intimation of my own intentions.
Nevertheless, the same localities in town and country, the same
friends, confidentially acquainted with all the past, could scarcely
be seen without emotion by either of us--still and for ever lovers,
although drawn apart in a mysterious way. It was an accursed state,
which in a certain sense resembled Hades, or the meeting of the happy
with the unhappy dead.

There were moments when departed days seemed to revive, but instantly
vanished again, like ghosts.

Some kind people had told me in confidence, that Lili, when all the
obstacles to, our union were laid before her, had declared that for my
love she was ready to renounce all present ties and advantages, and to
go with me to America. America was then perhaps, still more than now,
the Eldorado of all who found themselves crossed in the wishes of the
moment.

But the very thing which should have animated my hopes, only depressed
them the more. My handsome paternal house, only a few hundred steps
from hers, offered certainly a more tolerable and more attractive
habitation than an uncertain and remote locality beyond the ocean;
still I do not deny, that in her presence all hopes, all wishes sprang
to life again, and irresolution was stirring within me.

True, the injunctions of my sister were very peremptory and precise;
not only had she, with all the shrewd penetration of which she was
mistress, explained the situation of things to me, but she had also,
with painfully cogent letters, harped upon the same text still more
powerfully. "It were very well," said she, "if you could not help it,
then you would have to put up with it; such things one must _suffer_
but not _choose._" Some months passed away in this most miserable of
all conditions; every circumstance had conspired against the union; in
her alone I felt, I knew, lay the power which could have overcome every
difficulty.

Both the lovers, conscious of their position, avoided all solitary
interviews; but, in company, they could not help meeting in the usual
formal way. It was now that the strongest trial was to be gone through,
as every noble and feeling soul will acknowledge, when I have explained
myself more fully.

It is generally allowed, that in a new acquaintance, in the formation
of a new attachment, the lover gladly draws a veil over the past.
Growing affection troubles itself about no antecedents, and as it
springs up like genius with the rapidity of lightning, it knows nothing
either of past or future. It is true, my closer intimacy with Lili had
begun by her telling me the story of her early youth: how, from a child
up, she had excited in many both a liking and devotion to herself,
especially in strangers visiting her father's gay and lively house, and
how she had found her pleasure in all this, though it had been attended
with no further consequences and had lead to no permanent tie.

[Side-note: Lili's Old Lovers.]

True, lovers consider all that they have felt before only as
preparation for their present bliss, only as the foundation on which
the structure of their future life is to be reared. Past attachments
seem like spectres of the night, which glide away before the break of
day.

But what occurred! The fair came on, and with it appeared the whole
swarm of those spectres in their reality; all the mercantile friends
of the eminent house came one by one, and it was soon manifest
that not a man among them was willing or able wholly to give up a
certain claim to the lovely daughter. The younger ones, without being
obtrusive, still seemed to claim the rights of familiar friends; the
middle-aged, with a certain obliging dignity, like those who seek to
make themselves beloved, and who in all probability might come forward
with higher claims. There were fine men among them, with the additional
recommendation of a substantial fortune.

The older gentlemen, with their _uncle's_ ways and manners, were
altogether intolerable; they could not bridle their hands, and in the
midst of their disagreeable twaddle would demand a kiss, for which the
cheek was not refused. It was so natural to her, gracefully to satisfy
every one. The conversation, too, excited many a painful remembrance.
Allusion was constantly made to pleasure parties by water and by land,
to perils of all kinds with their happy escapes, to balls and evening
promenades, to the amusement afforded by ridiculous wooers, and to
whatever could excite an uncomfortable jealousy in the heart of an
inconsolable lover, who had, as it were, for a long time drawn to
himself the sum of so many years. But amid all this crowd and gaiety,
she did not push aside her friend, and when she turned to him, she
contrived, in a few words, to express all the tenderness which seemed
allowable to their present position.

But let us turn from this torture, of which the memory even is almost
intolerable, to poesy, which afforded, at least, an intellectual and
heartfelt alleviation of my sufferings.

"_Lili's Menagerie_" belongs somewhere to this period; I do not adduce
the poem here, because it does not reveal the softer sentiment, but
seeks only, with genial earnestness, to exaggerate the disagreeable,
and by comical, and provoking images, to change renunciation into
despair.

The _following song_ expresses rather the sweeter side of that misery,
and on that account is here inserted:

    Sweetest roses, ye are drooping,
      By my love ye were not worn;
    Bloom for one, who past all hoping,
      Feels his soul by sorrow torn.

    Oh, the days still live in thought, love,
      When to thee, my angel, bound;
    I my garden early sought, love,
      And for thee the young buds found.

    All the flowers and fruits I bore thee,
      And I cast them at thy feet;
    As I proudly stood before thee,
      Then my heart with hope would beat!

    Sweetest roses, ye are drooping,
      By my love ye were not worn;
    Bloom for one, who past all hoping,
      Feels his soul by sorrow torn.

The opera of "_Erwin and Elvira_" was suggested by the pretty
little romaunt or ballad introduced by Goldsmith in his "_Vicar of
Wakefield_," which had given us so much pleasure in our happiest days,
when we never dreamed that a similar fate awaited us.

I have already introduced some of the poetical productions of
this epoch, and I only wish they had all been preserved. A never
failing excitement in the happy season of love, heightened by the
beginning of care, gave birth to songs, which throughout expressed
no overstrained emotion, but always the sincere feeling of the
moment. From social songs for festivals, down to the most trifling of
presentation-verses--all was living and real and what a refined company
had sympathized in; first glad, then sorrowful, till finally there was
no height of bliss, no depth of woe, to which a strain was not devoted.

All these internal feelings and outward doings, so far as they were
likely to vex and pain my father, were by my mother's bustling prudence
skilfully kept from him. Although his hope of seeing me lead into
his house, that first one (who had so fully realised his ideas of a
daughter-in-law) had died away, still this "state-lady," as he used to
call her in his confidential conversations with ms wife, would never
suit him.

Nevertheless he let matters take their course, and diligently occupied
himself with his little Chancery. The young juristic friend, as well as
the dexterous amanuensis, gained continually more and more of influence
under his firm. As the absentee was now no longer missed there, they
let me take my own way, and sought to establish themselves firmly upon
a ground on which I was not destined to thrive.

Fortunately my own tendencies corresponded with the sentiments and
wishes of my father. He had so great an idea of my poetic talents, and
felt so personal a pleasure in the applause which my earliest efforts
had obtained, that he often talked to me on the subject of new and
further attempts. On the other hand, I did not venture to communicate
to him any of these social effusions and poems of passion.

[Side-note: Plan of Egmont.]

As, in _Götz von Berlichingen_, I had in my own way mirrored forth the
image of an important epoch of the world, I now again carefully looked
round for another crisis in political history of similar interest.
Accordingly the Revolt of the Netherlands attracted my attention. In
Götz, I had depicted a man of parts and energy, sinking under the
delusion that, in times of anarchy, ability and honesty of purpose must
have their weight and influence. The design of Egmont was to shew that
the most firmly established institutions cannot maintain themselves
against a powerful and shrewdly calculating Despotism. I had talked so
earnestly with my father about what the piece ought to be, and what I
wanted to do, that it inspired him with an invincible desire to see
the plan which I had already worked out in my head, fairly set down on
paper, in order to its being printed and admired.

In earlier times, while I still hoped to gain Lili's hand, I had
applied myself with the utmost diligence to the study and practice
of legal business, but now I sought to fill the fearful gulf which
separated me from her, with occupations of more intellect and soul. I
therefore set to work in earnest with the composition of Egmont. Unlike
the first _Götz von Berlichingen_, however, it was not written in
succession and in order; but immediately after the first introduction
I went at once to the main scenes without troubling myself about the
various connecting links. I made rapid progress, because my father,
knowing my fitful way of working, spurred me on (literally and without
exaggeration) day and night, and seemed to believe that the plan, so
easily conceived, might as easily be executed.
