LETTERS DURING 1839, 1840, 1841.



AUX JARDIES, February 12, 1839.

When this letter reaches you, it is probable that the fate of "L'École
des Ménages" [formerly "La Première Demoiselle"] will have been decided;
and while you read these words they may be representing that play, so
long meditated, which perhaps may fall flat in two hours. It has taken
on great proportions; there are five leading rôles and the subject
is vast. It touches the painful spot of modern morals: marriage; but
perhaps the personages lack certain conditions in order to become
types. To my eyes, the play is precisely the bourgeois family. But it
has a certain inferiority through that very thing.

I am going to-morrow to come to an understanding with the managers
of the Renaissance, after many protocols exchanged between them and
a friend who has undertaken to fight for my interests; the play will
be mounted in twenty days. I took, to lay out my ideas and write them
down for me, a poor young man of letters, named Lassailly, who has not
written two lines worth preserving. I never saw such incapacity. But he
has been useful to me in making the first germ, on which I can work.
Nevertheless, I would have liked some one of more intelligence and wit.
Théophile Gautier is coming to do the second play in five acts, and I
expect much from him.

Nevertheless, dear countess, it is impossible for me to do all
that I have undertaken, and all that I must do to get out of my
embarrassments. Here is what I have accomplished the last month:
"Béatrix, ou Les Amours Forcés," two volumes 8vo, wholly written and
corrected, which is coming out in the "Siècle;" "Un Grand homme de
Province à Paris," the end of "Illusions Perdues," of which only the
second volume remains to do, and that will be done this week. Besides
which, three plays: "L'École des Ménages," "La Gina," and "Richard
Cœur d'Éponge."

Well, after such great labour (for I have just as much for the month of
March) shall I gain my liberty, shall I owe nothing to any one, shall
I have the tranquillity of soul of a man from whom no one has money
to demand? I begin to feel some fatigue. Just now, on beginning to go
to work, I found it impossible to take it up with my usual ardour; I
thought of you; I wanted to tell you across space how often you are
here, and to confide to you my little sorrows and my great works, or,
if you like, my little works and my great sorrows.


March 13.

How many things have happened in my life since I wrote the last lines!
In the first place, twenty days employed in correcting and rewriting
my play for the people of the Renaissance theatre; who have brutally
rejected it from want of money to make the first payment agreed upon.
Then, the reading of it before certain of the actors and the director
of the Théâtre Français who thought it magnificent, but impossible to
act as it then was, because of the union of tragedy and comedy. They
want it either the one or the other. Next, a reading at the house of
Madame Saint-Clair, sister of Madame Delmar, in presence of three
ambassadors, English, Austrian, and Sardinian, with their wives, Madame
Molé, M. de Maussion, Custine, etc. Delight and criticism. After which,
second and last reading at Custine's, in presence of another wave of
the great world, who all wish to see it performed. I have coldly put
away my play in a box, and this morning Planche came and asked me for
it, to see what it is like. He is to give me his opinion next Sunday.

So, dear, much to do, much company, much annoyance, and little result.
However, let me tell you that Taylor, the collector of Spanish pictures
and former Commissary for the King to the Théâtre Français, and the
director Védel and Desmousseaux have taken so high an opinion of me
as a dramatic writer that they have asked me to give them, as soon as
possible, a play entirely comic, saying that they would have it played
immediately. They are convinced that I can write for the stage.


March 16.

Planche took my play to read; he is to return it in two days, and will
doubtless tell me what it is worth. Stendhal, who was present at the
reading at Custine's, writes me the little line which I enclose in this
letter, and which he signs, by an inexplicable habit, Cotonet. He never
signs, except officially, his real name, Henri Beyle.

I am not well in body or in mind. I feel a horrible lassitude, which,
in regard to my head, is not without danger. I have no longer either
force or courage. The obstacles I have been accustomed to overcome
increase enormously and terrify me. Anxieties about money have
become for me what the Furies were to Orestes. I am without support,
enervated, without even kindly sentiments, without the faculty of
feeling any, of any kind. I am a negation. Ah! these moments are
terrible, especially when, for want of money, I cannot shake myself
together by a journey. There are no pleasures for me; none but those of
the heart. That is the only thing that intellect has not yet overrun;
it is the only thing it can never displace.

Adieu; this is a letter on which I have written for two months; for
two months it has lain among my papers and I take it up when I have
exhausted the _feuillets_ beneath which I place it.


April 14.

Dear, here is another month gone by. What a month! I have just received
your letter. If my irregularity grieves you, yours kills me; it has
made me think you did not want any more of my letters, and that you
have left me like a body without a soul. I have, however, been working
day and night. The endless corrections of the "Grand homme de Province"
and of "Béatrix," also articles to write, obliged me to put myself into
a garret in Paris, where I am close to the printing-offices, and thus
lose no time. I have not had even a fleeting moment to continue this
letter; I have only slept by chance, when I dropped from fatigue. I am
wholly weaned from life, and absolutely indifferent whether I live or
do not live.

Here is the news. You will see M. de Custine; he goes to Russia. He
will take you the manuscript of "Séraphita,"--the manuscript, you
understand, not the proofs; they are too voluminous. He will see you;
he is rich; he is happy in being able to travel at his ease! He will
make, if necessary, a _détour_ to see you.

I have reached a point when, in contemplating coldly my situation,
I see I have now but two ways of cutting the Gordian knot. Either I
must sell my work, to be made the most of by others during ten years,
for one hundred and fifty thousand francs; or, if I do not succeed in
recovering tranquillity by that means, I must insure my life for that
sum, which is the total of my debt, and fling myself into work as into
a gulf from which I know I shall never issue; for, from the weakness
that assails me after my toil has passed a certain limit, I feel that a
man can die from excess of it.

Planche has brought back my play. He thinks it is above what is now
being done; but we are not of the same opinion as to its faults.
Brought to the point of view of art, it has many.

Beyle has just published the finest book, as I think, which has
appeared these fifty years. It is called "La Chartreuse de Parme." I
don't know whether you can procure it. If Macchiavelli had written a
novel, it would have been this one. Jules Sandeau has lately dragged
George Sand through the mire in a book called "Marianna." He has
given himself a fine rôle, that of Henry! He! good God! You will
read the book and it will horrify you, I am sure. It is anti-French,
anti-gentleman. Henry ends as Jules ought to have ended (when one loves
truly and is betrayed),--by death. But to live, and write this book, is
awful.

Dear, do not blame my friendship. Some day you will know the life I
am now leading, the burdens I am bearing. The terrace walls of Les
Jardies have all rolled down. I must buy more ground, with a house on
it, and I have no money. This house, my dream of tranquillity, my dear
Chartreuse, needs fifteen or twenty thousand francs to settle me in it;
and I don't know if ever my days can flow here peacefully. Twelve years
of toil, of pain and grief, have left me as I was the first day, with a
burden as heavy and as difficult to remove. Madame de Staël said, "Fame
is the brilliant mourning of happiness."

Your project of coming to the banks of the Rhine makes my heart beat.
Oh! come. But you will not come. It would be so easy for me to go to
Baden and see the Rhine; the journey is neither long nor costly, and
a journey is so necessary to me. The mail-cart goes to Strasburg, and
from there, in two minutes, to Germany; it is only ten days and twenty
louis. Oh! I don't know if you have not warmed up my courage, and
re-tempered my soul. I will not give the manuscript to M. de Custine.
I will bring it to you, that and the others. If you do this, I will
bring you a fine pianist for Anna; I will--I don't know what I will not
do, for those lines in your letter have warmed me,--I have returned to
the idea that life is endurable.

You will find me much changed, but physically; horribly aged, with
white hairs,--in short, _un vieux bonhomme_. "You show now that you
wear your laurels," M. de Beauchesne said to me the other day. The
speech was pretty, if exaggerated. I am sure that on the other side of
the Rhine I shall grow young again. When I think that as soon as this
letter reaches you (which takes a month) you may be coming, and that I
shall see you in June, precisely at the moment when I shall be unable
to write and in need of rest!--But it is all a dream; I must return to
post and letter-paper, to the power of the imagination of the heart, to
memory.

Adieu; in my next letter I will tell you what happens, and how the
present crisis ends for me; the matters pending between Louis-Philippe
and the Chambers have complicated it.



AUX JARDIES, June 2, 1839.

I received your last letter to-day when I have just missed,
fortunately, breaking my leg in going to see the devastation of my
grounds produced by a storm. My foot slipped; and the whole weight of
the _body_ came on the left foot which twisted under me and all the
muscles about the ankle were violently wrenched, and cracked with a
great noise. The amount of will I put into supporting myself gave me
a pain of extreme violence in the solar plexus; I suffered there more
than I did in the ankle, though that pain made me suppose I had broken
my leg. The head surgeon of the hospital at Versailles came, and I
shall have to stay in bed two weeks. There, dear countess! I find one
compensation, namely: that all my horrible financial and literary
affairs, etc., being interrupted by a superior power, I can write you
to my heart's content, for it is very long since I have been with you.
Alas! I have had so much to do. Les Jardies have cost me many wakeful
nights. But we won't speak of that.

Well, as M. de Talleyrand used to say, foresee griefs and you are sure
to be a prophet. No more trip to the banks of the Rhine! However, for
one piece of bad news I will give you a good piece. If the Chamber of
Deputies votes our law on literary property I shall doubtless have to
go to Saint Petersburg, and I shall return through the Ukraine. But in
any case, dear of dears, my first journey will be to you. So long as
Les Jardies are not in order I cannot travel; it would be too great a
folly, it would be ruin. Happily my accident has happened just as I had
finished "Un Grand homme de Province à Paris." Otherwise, I don't know
what would have become of me with my publishers.

M. de Custine is not going to Russia; only as far as Berlin. So I took
your precious manuscript out of its hiding-place for nothing.

During the two days that I have been in bed a rage, a veritable rage,
possesses me to see you. Every time that I am alone, that I re-enter
myself, that my brain is cleared, that I am with my heart, it is always
so. Your letter distressed me. It came when I was in the midst of those
sweet reveries that are my elysium, and I thought your letter cold,
ceremonious, religious. I hated you for two days. I hid that letter; it
put me out of temper. You say in it that you are my old friend. If that
is so, learn that I have loved you only since yesterday. Treat me with
more coquetry. When have you received a letter without an autograph?
Know, countess, that out of your eleven million friends in France and
other countries there is not half a million who would have perpetuated
that little attention; it shows a perennial affection which proves that
my friendship is still in its spring. Were you fifty years old, my
eyes would always see you in that heart's-ease-coloured gown, looking
as you did on the Crêt at Neufchâtel. You have no idea of either my
heart or my character. Fy! Do not think it so easy to get rid of me.

My health has borne up under work which has amazed literary men. I am
at my twelfth volume. You must read "Un Grand homme," a book full of
vigour, in which you will find those great personages of my work, as
you are good enough to call them,--Florine, Nathan, Lousteau, Blondet,
Finot. That which will commend the work to foreigners is its audacious
painting of the inner manners and morals of Parisian journalism, which
is fearful in its accuracy. I alone was in a position to tell the truth
to our journalists, and fight them to the death. That book will not be
forbidden in Russia.

I have at this moment under my pen "Le Curé de Village" to finish,
the second episode of which, entitled "Véronique," will appear in the
"Presse." This book will be loftier, grander, and stronger than "Le Lys
dans la Vallée" and "Le Médecin de campagne;" the two known fragments
of it have justified my promises.

In a life as busy as mine nothing produces much effect; I have worked
as usual through the riots. But a month or so ago Planche and I said to
each other, "Shots will be fired within six weeks." And so it was.

A Russian professor from Moscow came to see me lately,--M. Chevireff;
I love all that ends in _eff_ on account of Berditchef; I am child
enough to fancy it brings me nearer to you. It is thus that the words
"Geneva," "Vienna" never sound in my ears without effect. The longer I
love, the more Hoffmannesque I become on that subject.

So it is all over about the Rhine! You could not believe what agitation
was caused me by those two fatal lines, written perhaps unconsciously,
in which you tell me that your journey is put off. It was so easy
for me to go to the Rhine, even with all my business matters and the
newspapers on my hands. The mail-carts go so rapidly now from Paris to
the Rhine. Well, I must put this, too, with many a golden dream! The
springtide will console you; nothing consoles me. I see by the date of
your letter that you wrote on my fête-day, and you did not think of
it! I still my complaints; for I should seem very ridiculous in both
cases; but I remarked that you put fewer lines in your pages, and that
you were, in point of fact, getting rid of me. Perhaps I deserve it for
telling you, in one of my former letters, how little time I have to
write to you, with an air as if I boasted of my fidelity. Alas! that
was only a bit of childish candour, which you ought not to punish. Some
day I will tell you the truth about that passage; you will be touched,
and ashamed that you were ever angry with me.

Do not think that because there are four hundred leagues between us
I do not know how to read the thoughts that lie beneath your sublime
forehead. I can parade them before you, one by one. It suffices me to
examine your letter with the attention of a Cuvier to know the exact
frame of mind in which it was written; and you had, when writing this
letter, something against me, no doubt. You will tell me later what it
was.

My Jardies get on but slowly. The buildings are still of little
importance; but all is heavy on those who have nothing. I am beginning
to have trouble with my eyes, and that grieves me; I shall have to
cease working at night.

Did I tell you that "Béatrix" is finished? You will see it, no doubt,
in the "Revue de Saint Pétersbourg," but bad and emasculated. It
will only be good in the 8vo edition now in press. Those puritans of
liberalism who manage the "Siècle" in which "Béatrix" appeared assume
to have morals, and demolish the archbishop's palace! This is the
buffoonery of folly. They are afraid of the word "bosom," and trample
morality under foot! they will not allow the word _volupté_ to be
printed, but they upset social order! The wife of the director-in-chief
is as scraggy as a bag of nails, and they suppressed a joke of Camille
Maupin on the bones of Béatrix! I will make you laugh heartily when I
tell you all the negotiations required to get into that newspaper a
joke on the bitch of M. de Halga. Unfortunately for me, you will read
that book mangled and expurgated.

What a pretty nest Les Jardies will be when finished! How happy one
might be here! What a beautiful valley, cool as a Swiss valley. The
royal park a few steps off! Paris in a quarter of an hour, and Paris a
hundred leagues away! What a beautiful life if--But I begin to think
like the capucin monk: we are not placed here below to take our comfort.

The Exhibition of pictures has been very fine this year. There were
seven or eight masterpieces, in several styles: a superb Decamps; a
magnificent Cleopatra by Delacroix; a splendid portrait by Amaury
Duval; a charming Venus Anadyomene by Chassériau, a pupil of Ingres.
What a misfortune to be poor when one has the heart of an artist!

The first _young girl_ work that I do I shall dedicate to your dear
Anna; but I shall await a word about that in your next letter; for I
must know if it be agreeable to you that I should do this.

It seems there is to be, next autumn, a dahlia-Balzac. If you would
like a cutting tell me how to send it to you. It will be, they say, a
magnificent flower; in case the attempt to vary the stock succeeds.

You wish me the tranquillity of soul that you enjoy. Alas! I have
passions, or, to speak more correctly, passion, too living, too
palpitating, to be able to extinguish my soul. You would never imagine
in what agitations I live; for me, nothing is lost or forgotten; all
that affects me is of yesterday. The tree, the water, the mountain,
the dress, the look, the fear, the pleasure, the danger, the emotion,
even the sand, the colour of a wall, the slightest incident, all things
shine in my soul, as fresh, and more extended daily. I forget all that
is not within the domain of the heart; or, at least, whatever is in
the domain of imagination needs to be recalled and firmly meditated.
But all that belongs to my love is my life; and when I yield myself
to it, it seems to me that then, alone, I live. I count those hours
of delightful abandonment only; those are my hours of sunshine and of
joy. But you will never imagine that; it is the poesy of the heart,
heightened by an incredible power of intuition. I never pride myself on
what is called talent; nor yet on my will which is held to be kindred
with that of Napoleon. But I do render thanks and take pride in my
heart, in the constancy of my affections. _There_ is my wealth; _there_
are the treasures beyond the reach of the one who coined that gold;
the workman who made those ducats is far away, but the miser holds
them ever in his hand. "I know you have a great and noble soul; and I
know where to touch you; I will make you blush for me." That speech is
one of my ducats. For many a fool it would have been nothing; to me it
rings sublime; and if I did not love like an imbecile, a collegian, a
ninny, a madman, like anything you please that is most extravagant, I
should have worshipped that woman as a divinity.

I don't know whether all this will not seem to you Swedenborgian; but
it belongs to my history, and I will some day explain it to you. At
any rate, I will say this. Those words were said to me by a rather
extraordinary woman, whom I will not name, in a fit of mistaken
jealousy. Well, I assure you that a month never passes that I do not
remember the look of the sky at the moment they were said, and the
colour of the cloud I saw there.

Adieu. In ten days my leg will be much better; but I shall have written
to you again before then. I will tell you my reveries, one by one.
You will count for much in my idleness; which is for me the mother of
memories.

I am glad to know that all goes well in your States. But, on the word
of an honest man, I don't understand why the count does not arrange his
affairs so as to have no longer any care. When I have settled mine--and
I shall then be, incontestably, a far greater financier than he--I will
go and offer him my services to make something out of nothing--forgive
that joke!

All gracious things to Mademoiselle Séverine, and to your dear Anna;
my affectionate compliments to the Grand Marshal, and to you the most
precious and sweetest offerings of my heart.

No Custine, no pearls; that is a loss to you, for the set is very fine;
you would have been queen of the balls at Kiew next winter. But you
will be that without the pearls.



AUX JARDIES, July, 1839.

I am cured. The accident, which kept me in bed forty days without
moving, has left no traces except some pain in the muscles. But your
silence disquiets me much. Is anything going wrong with you? Are you
travelling? All this exercises my mind, tortures me, besieges me with a
thousand dragon-fancies.

I am overwhelmed with business. The disaster of my fallen walls is not
yet repaired. I have been obliged to purchase land, which has ruined
me. The masons must be here for another month. It is all the more
impossible for me to get away because my illness has put my work into
arrears, and also because I have let one of the three houses on the
place to the Visconti family.[1]

A novel of mine is about to appear, named "Pierrette," with which you
will no doubt be pleased. "Une Princesse Parisienne" will also be out
soon. "Véronique," the second fragment of the "Curé de village," is
already out. "Les Paysans," that is, "Qui Terre a, Guerre a," is in
process of being bought and published by the "Constitutionnel." And
finally "Le Ménage d'un Garçon" and "Le Martyr calviniste" are in the
hands of the compositors of the "Siècle;" "Massimilla Doni," appears
with the true edition of "La Fille d'Ève;" "Béatrix" is nearly printed.
I am now going to work on the last part of "Illusions Perdues," finish
the "Curé de village," and do a great drama for the Porte-Saint-Martin.

There, dear, there is where we now are; and I have certainly drawn down
upon me the hatred of all the men of the pen by "Un Grand homme de
Province." Growls resound in the press. But you see I continue my work
intrepidly, keeping on with even steps, and tolerably insensible to
calumny--like all those who have never given cause for slander.

I shall have three houses to let, each looking out on inclosed gardens;
and I will only let this elegant village to extremely distinguished
people. Our railway will begin to run in a few days, and I can enter
a carriage from my garden; so that I am really in the heart of Paris
(which I have never been before), because for eight sous and in fifteen
or twenty minutes I am there. So I am enchanted with Les Jardies. When
all the necessary ground is bought and the gardens planted, it will
be delicious, and envied by all the world. Railways change all the
conditions of life around Paris. I have still some things to remove
from Chaillot; some furniture to bring out; so that various material
annoyances have delayed this letter, for I can trust no one to do
anything. I am alone, bachelor that I am, without servants, except a
gardener and his wife. I will have nothing until my debts are paid. So
I am living devilishly, without in the least caring what people think
of me; for I _will_ attain to independence and tranquillity.

I shall have, a few days hence, a delightful little story which Anna
can read; I would like to dedicate it to her; you must tell me if it
would be a pleasure to her, and to you, also.

Alas! the brutal indifference of the powers that be and the Chambers
to literary men, who have now reached the last degree of endurance,
is such that the bill on literary property remains between the two
Chambers and has never been brought forward, so that our journey as the
representatives of the lettered class (of which I told you, and which
would have given me the chance to go and see you) will not take place.
But I have not lost all hope. I shall go to Germany, to the banks of
the Rhine, probably, and once there, I may be able to go and bid you
good-day; if I have only a few moments to stay, at least I shall see
you. This would take two months, and two months means that I must leave
four or five thousand francs for payments in my absence. I must have
good luck to get them! If my buildings are finished by August 15, and I
can provide for all my payments, it is possible I may escape. That is
why I am, just now, very busy in stuffing the newspapers with articles.
But if the "Constitutionnel" decides to take "Les Paysans" I shall have
to put off going till September.

We say in France, "No letters, good news." I hope the interruption in
your letters means that result; but why not have written me a single
little line? It is conceivable that I who lead the triple life of
literary man, debtor, and builder, and also that of a man defending
himself against feuilletonists, and who now am managing, so to speak,
the Société des Gens-de-lettres (one of the greatest things for the
future to be done in France),--it is, I say, conceivable that my
letters should be sometimes involuntarily delayed. But you, who have
only to let yourself live in your Ukraine! Ah! you are very guilty; for
you know the happiness given by your judgments, your ideas. "'Tis from
the North our light doth come," said Voltaire, to flatter the Empress.
But I--I say it piously.

Well, I must leave you for "Pierrette." I have just risen; it is two in
the morning. I belong to the printer.

[Footnote 1: Count Émile Guidoboni-Visconti, to whom Balzac had
rendered a service in settling a question of family inheritance. Madame
Visconti was an Englishwoman, and to her "Béatrix" is dedicated under
her Christian name, Sarah.--TR.]


July 15.

I have not spoken to you of "L'Épicier," "La Femme comme il faut,"
"Le Rentier," and "Le Notaire," four figures I have done for Curmer's
"Les Français peints par eux-mêmes." You will, no doubt, read those
little sketches. I have just been giving a last touch to "Une Princesse
Parisienne;" it is the greatest moral comedy that exists. It relates a
mass of lies by which a woman, thirty-seven years of age, the Duchesse
de Maufrigneuse, now become the Princesse de Cadignan, succeeds in
getting herself taken for a saint, a virtuous, modest young girl by her
fourteenth admirer; it is, in short, the last degree of depravity in
sentiment. She is, as Madame de Girardin said, "Célimène in love." The
subject is of all lands and of all times. The masterly part of it is to
have made the lies seem necessary and right, justified by love. It is
one of the diamonds in the crown of your servant. Put it with the other
old trinkets of my literary jewellery.

Adieu, for I am overwhelmed with work. Alas! few pleasures; all
is anxiety and disappointment. My life is a strange and continual
deception; I, who was manufactured expressly, as I believe, for
happiness! Is that providential?

Many affectionate things to all. The autograph I send is Berryer's.



AUX JARDIES, August, 1839.

I have received your last letter, and I think there is something
wonderful in our double existence: with you the deepest peace, with
me the most active war; with you repose, with me incessant struggle.
You could never imagine the ever up-springing torments to which I am
subjected. But I don't know why I tell you these things, for many a
time you have told me they were my own fault and that I was wrong.

Les Jardies are nearly done; a few days more and I shall have finished
the buildings. Only a few trifling things remain to do. But I shall
not be easy till all is paid for, and that _all_ is a fortune;
thousand-franc notes are there engulfed like ships in the sea. The
burden of literary production is doubled, and also complicated by the
exactions of publishers who want all their books at once, whereas
critics say I write too much. Then everybody wants his money at once.
A terrible desire has seized me the last few days to abandon this
life--not by suicide, which I shall always consider silly, but by
quitting, in imitation of Molière's Maître Jacques, my coachman's
top-coat for a cook's jacket; that is, by making believe that my work,
my Jardies, my debts, my family, my name, that all that is I is dead
and buried, or as if it had never existed, and then go off to some
distant country, America of the North or South, under another name, and
there (taking, perhaps, another form) begin another life with happier
fortunes.


September.

I am excessively agitated by a horrible affair,--the Peytel affair. I
have seen that poor fellow three times. He is condemned to death. I am
starting in two hours for Bourg.[1]

[Footnote 1: This curious episode in Balzac's life, in which Gavarni
took a leading part, seems to have been a piece of generous and
imaginative folly. But with M. Zola's late action in mind, the
reflection suggests itself that if we knew all the circumstances of
the case (now passed into oblivion) we might find that Balzac and
Gavarni had cause to think themselves right. A brief outline of the
affair is given in the Appendix. Balzac's argument of the case will be
found in the Édition Définitive, vol. xxii.; Polémique Judiciare, pp.
579-625.--TR.]


October 30.

You will perhaps have heard that, after two months of unheard-of
efforts to snatch him from his doom, Peytel went, two days ago, to the
scaffold, "like a Christian," the priest said; I say, like a man who
was not guilty.

You can now understand this horrible gap in my correspondence. Ah!
dear, my affairs were already in a bad enough state, but this devotion
of mine has cost me a crazy sum, five thousand francs at least in
money, and five thousand more in non-working. Calumnies of all kinds
have been my reward. Henceforth I shall, I think, see an innocent man
murdered without meddling; I will do as the Spaniards do--run away when
a man is stabbed.

We will talk of that, for I am going to see you; I can promise you
that; I shall be, beyond a doubt, out of all condition to write for
several months, in consequence of fatigue. I am now preparing the drama
of "Vautrin" in five acts, at the Porte-Saint-Martin. I am finishing
"Le Curé de Village;" idem "Sœur Marie des Anges;" idem "Les Paysans;"
idem "Les Petites Misères de la Vie conjugale;" idem "Pierrette,"
dedicated to your dear Anna; idem "La Frélore."

When all that is done, if I do not have a brain-fever, I shall be on
the Berlin road, to divert my mind, and I shall go as far as Dresden.
And one does not go to see the Dresden Madonna without keeping on to
see the Saint of Wierzchownia.


November 2.

I have had frightful troubles about which I cannot write you a word;
it would be suffering them twice over. I was on the point of wanting
food and lights and paper. I have been hunted like a hare, worse than
a hare, by sheriffs. I am here, alone, at Les Jardies. My mother is
much distressed. I alone am in the secret of the future. I see, within
two months, events which will carry me onward in the difficult path of
liberation.

I work so fast that I cannot tell you of what I am doing. You will
read later a little pearl, the "Princesse Parisienne," who is the
Duchesse de Maufrigneuse at thirty-seven years of age. You have not yet
received, I think, "Un Grand homme de Province à Paris," which is not
only a book but a great action, and, above all, courageous. The howls
of the press continue.

But now, exhausted by so many struggles, I am going to give myself up
to that delightful composition, "Sœur Marie des Anges,"--human love
leading up to divine love.

"Pierrette" is one of those tender flowers of melancholy which are
certain in advance of success. As the book is for Anna I will not tell
you anything about it, but leave you the pleasure of surprise.


December, 1839.

You see me stupefied. I find a letter which I join to this one. I
thought it posted, but, in the midst of my turmoil, it was slipped
under the papers of "Pierrette." In finishing "Pierrette" and clearing
up my desk, I found it, when I thought it was in your hands! I now
understand why you have not written to me. You think me dead and
buried, or something.

Yesterday I received a great literary affront. "Pierrette" was refused
by the "Siècle." I can truly say it was a pearl sweated from my
sufferings, for I am all suffering. There is nothing extraordinary in
believing that I sent you a letter that was lying, in my desk, I forget
to live.

I had presented myself for the Academy (thirty-nine visits to pay!),
but to-day I have withdrawn before Victor Hugo, whose autograph on the
subject I inclose. I work eighteen hours and sleep six. I eat while I
work, and I believe I do not cease to work while sleeping, for there
are literary difficulties on which I postpone decision till I wake, and
I find them all solved when I do wake; thus my brain must work while I
sleep.

I still count, as soon as I have an instant of tranquillity on going
via Dresden to you.

I have had thirteen successive proofs of "Pierrette;" that is to say,
it has been remade thirteen times. I did "César Birotteau" seventeen
times. But as I did "Pierrette" in ten days you can imagine what the
work was, and it was not the only thing I had on my hands. I have
passed into the condition of a steam-engine, but an engine which,
unfortunately, has a heart,--a heart which suffers, which feels at all
points of a vast circumference, which everything affects, afflicts,
wounds, and which never misses any pain. There is no longer consolation
for me; the bitter cup is drained, i believe no more in a happy future;
but I live on, pushed by the vigorous hand of duty. I stretch my
sorrowing hands to you across the distance, wishing that you may always
have that good and peaceful, tranquil life in which, at times, my
thought, unknown to you, has gone to rest. Yes, there are hours when,
sinking beneath my burden, I fancy myself arriving and living without
cares, if not without griefs, in that oasis of the Ukraine.

A thousand friendly things to those about you. Believe in the eternal
affection of your more than ever poor moujik.


January 20, 1840.

I hear nothing from the Ukraine. It is more than three months that
I have had no letter from you, and I do not comprehend it. Have I
given you pain? Have you taken ill the silences to which I have been
compelled? Are you punishing me for my miseries? Are you ill? Are you
at the bedside of any one of yours? I ask myself a thousand questions.

I have seen by the merest chance the Princess Constantine, at a ball
given by Prince Tufiakin, the only one to which I have gone for two
years. From her I heard that she had news from you, while I, nothing!
That fact has caused me the most violent distress. The troubles of
money are nothing but annoyances; but all that touches the heart--ah!
those are the real griefs. To be thus overwhelmed on all sides, is it
not enough to make life intolerable! It is already heavy enough to me
who have not a single prospect on which my eyes can rest themselves.
All is savage, barren, gashed with precipices. At forty years of age,
after fifteen years of constant toil, one is permitted to be weary
of work which gives, as its result, a doubtful fame, a real misery,
superficial friendships without devotion, wasted sacrifices, growing
worries, burdens more and more heavy, and no pleasure. There are those
who paint my life very differently, but this is what it _is_. I have
lost the taste of many joys; there are pleasures of which I can no
longer conceive. I am frightened at a species of interior old age which
has come upon me. I don't know if I could now make those campaigns in
China which so diverted M. Hanski at Geneva.

At this moment "Pierrette," the story that belongs to your dear Anna,
is appearing in the "Siècle." They have taken out the dedication, which
will be put at the end, as an _envoi_. The stoppage of your letters
makes me fear that this may no longer be agreeable to you.

My situation is horribly precarious. The desire to pay what I owe
made me condemn myself to a life of extreme misery, but it serves for
nothing to live in that way. My conscience only is satisfied. At this
moment I am hoping that Rothschild will aid me. If he does not, then I
shall fall once more into the disasters of 1828. I shall be ruined for
the second time. There is something fatal in money. But I shall recover
life by writing for the stage.

This is now the 20th of January. My play "Vautrin," which is rehearsing
at the Porte-Saint-Martin, will be played on the 20th of February, and
it seems that I may count on a great financial success; I wrote it for
that. Still, if Rothschild does not help me, it is quite impossible
that I can get over the coming month. I shall have to lose my house,
furniture, and everything I have gathered to myself for the last twelve
years; and even that will not relieve me. My creditors will gain
nothing. I shall lose all, and owe just as much. It is horrible; but
it will happen; I foresee it. To tell you my efforts, my marches and
countermarches for the last three months would be to write volumes. And
all the while I had to work, to get my plays accepted, to invent them,
to write them. The royal indifference that pursues French literature is
communicated to all about us.

I have still two works to do, print, and publish to fulfil the
agreement I signed in 1838, which obliged me to give fourteen volumes.
I have given birth to ten between November, 1838, and January,
1840,--fourteen months. Those I shall now finish are "Sœur Marie des
Anges," and "Le Ménage d'un Garçon."

You have said nothing to me about "Un Grand homme de Province à Paris,"
which has raised such storms around me.

I am preparing several works for the stage. May heaven grant me help
and I shall be free through the profits of the stage combined with
those from publishers. In three months I could earn a great sum by
pledging myself for new books; and if luck would grant that publishers
might think of selling me under a cheap form I should be saved.

If there is any good news of this kind you shall have it very quickly;
as you shall that of the success or fall of "Vautrin." Frédérick
Lemaître, that actor who is so sympathetic to the masses and who
created the part of Robert Macaire, plays Vautrin.

At this moment I am organizing another play for a man of great talent,
Henri Monnier, from which I hope success. It is a piece in which
Prudhomme plays the leading part.

Adieu. Miserable or fortunate, I am always the same for you; and it is
because of that unchangeableness of heart that I am painfully wounded
by your abandonment. I may miss writing to you, carried away as I often
am by a life that resembles a torrent; but you, dear countess, why
do you deprive me of the sacred bread that came to me regularly and
restored my courage? Tell me. How will you explain it to me?


February, 1840.

Ah! I think you at last excessively small; and it shows me that you are
of this world. Ah! you write to me no longer because my letters are
rare! Well, they were rare because I often did not have the money to
post them, but I would not tell you that. Yes, my distress has reached
that point and beyond it. It is horrible, and sad, but it is true, as
true as the Ukraine where you are. Yes, there have been days when I
proudly ate a roll of bread on the boulevard. I have had the greatest
sufferings: self-love, pride, hope, prospects, all have been attacked.
But I shall, I hope, surmount everything, I had not one farthing, but I
earned for those atrocious Lecou and Delloye seventy thousand francs
in a year. The Peytel affair cost me ten thousand francs--and people
said I was paid fifty thousand! That affair and my fall which kept me
forty days in bed retarded everything.

Oh! I do not like your want of confidence. You think that I have a
great mind, but you will not admit that I have a great heart! After
nearly eight years you do not know me! My God, forgive her, for she
knows not what she does!

No, I was not _happy_ in writing "Béatrix;" you ought to have known it.
Yes, Sarah is Madame Visconti; yes, Mademoiselle des Touches is George
Sand; yes, Béatrix is even too much Madame d'Agoult. George Sand is at
the height of felicity; she takes a little vengeance on her friend.
Except for a few variations, _the story is true_.

Ah! I entreat you, never make comparisons between yourself and Madame
de Berny. She was a woman of infinite kindness and absolute devotion;
she was what she was. You are complete in your own way as she was in
hers. Two grand things should never be compared. They are what they are.

"Pierrette" has appeared in the "Siècle." The manuscript is bound for
Anna. Friends and enemies proclaim the little book a masterpiece; I
shall be glad if they are not mistaken. You will read it soon, as
the book is being printed. People put it beside the "Recherche de
l'Absolu." I am willing. I myself wish it put beside Anna.

Alas! yes; I am always writing; I blacken much paper, though I advance
but little. I am ashamed of my forced fecundity.

Your letter was no longer expected; I had lost all hope. I did not know
what to imagine; I believed you ill, and I went to inquire of Princess
Constantine. I should have gone to you, were it not for poverty. Oh!
you do not know what you are to me; but it is an unhappy passion.
Faith is not given; yours is not an absolute sentiment, and mine is. I
could believe you dead, I could not suppose you forgetting. Whereas,
under the pretext that I am a man, living in Paris, you imagine
monstrous things. Count my volumes on your fingers and reflect. I am
more in a desert in Paris than you are at Wierzchownia. I do not like
to have you write to any one in the world, still less to any one in
Paris, but Custine's address is 6 rue de La Rochefoucauld. Write,
Sévigné! I have obeyed as a moujik.

You have truly divined the affair of that poor Peytel; there are
fatalities in life. Oh! the circumstances were more than extenuating,
but impossible to prove. There are noblenesses in which men will never
believe. However, it is all over. I will let you read some day what he
wrote to me before going to the scaffold. I can take this matter to the
feet of God and many sins will be forgiven me. He was a martyr to his
honour. That which men applaud in Calderon, Shakespeare, and Lope de
Vega, they guillotined at Bourg.

I, who wish to marry, who desire it, and who, perhaps, may never marry,
for I wish to marry--in short, you know! But what you do not know is
this: in the first place, I have the most absolute kindliness, and the
will to let the being with whom I should have to walk through life
be happy as she wishes to be, never to shock her, and never be stern
except on one point, respect for social conventions. Love is a flower,
the seed of which is brought by the wind, and flowers where it drops.
It is as ridiculous to be angry with a woman because she does not love
us, as to be angry with fate for not giving us black hair when we have
red. In default of love, there is friendship; friendship is the secret
of conjugal life. One can bear not being loved, but this must not be
shown; it is losing half the fortune that remains to us, in despair at
having lost the other half.

This woman squinted, she was uncouth, her nature was horrible, but the
man was bent on having her; he lost his head a first time on seeing
an inferior being preferred to him, and he lost it a second time for
having lost it the first, in avenging himself. The woman was beneath
vengeance. I would not blame a woman too much for loving a king. But
if she loves Ruy Blas, it is vice that has put her there where she has
lowered herself; she no longer exists, she is not worth a pistol-shot.
That's enough said about it.

"Vautrin" is being mounted, vigorously. I have a rehearsal daily. When
you hold this letter in your hand, the great question will have been
decided. It is almost certain that "Vautrin" will be represented the
evening you hold this, for it will be between February 28 and March
5. A fortune in money and a fortune in literature are staked upon a
single evening! Frédérick Lemaître answers for its success. Harel, the
director, believes in it! As for me, I despaired of it ten days ago; I
thought the play stupid, and I was right. I wrote it all over again,
and I now think it passable. But it will always be a poor play. I have
yielded to the desire to put a romantic figure on the scene, and I did
wrong.

Yes, certainly, I want the view of Wierzchownia.


February 10.

T have surmounted many miseries, and if I have a success now they are
all over. Imagine, therefore, what will be my agony during the evening
when "Vautrin" is performed. In five hours of time it will be decided
whether I pay or do not pay my debts. I have been crushed by that
burden for fifteen years; it hampers the expansion of my life, it takes
from my heart its natural action, it stifles my thought, it soils my
existence, it embarrasses my movements, it stops my inspirations, it
weighs upon my conscience, it hinders all, it has barred my career,
it has broken my back, it has made me old. My God! have I paid dearly
enough for my place in the sun? All that calm future, that tranquillity
I need so much, all is about to be staked on a few hours, delivered
over to Parisian caprices, as it is at this moment to the censor.

Oh! how I need repose! I am forty years old. Forty years of suffering;
for the happiness I enjoyed beside an angel from 1823 to 1833 was the
counterpoise of an equal misery, and it needed strength to bear a joy
as infinite as pain. And then, how death put an end to that! and what a
death!--I sigh for the promised land of a tender marriage, weary as I
am of tramping this desert without water, scorching with sun and full
of Bedouins. Ten years hence, and who, good God! will care for me!

To go to see you is my constant desire; but for that I cannot leave
behind me either bills to pay or business, money anxieties or debts,
which still amount to sixty thousand francs at least; but "Vautrin" may
give them in four months!

Madame Visconti, of whom you speak to me, is one of the most amiable
of women, of an infinite, exquisite kindness; a delicate and elegant
beauty. She has helped me much to bear my life. She is gentle, but
full of firmness, immovable and implacable in her ideas and her
repugnances. She is a person to be depended on. She has not been
fortunate, or rather, her fortune and that of the count are not in
keeping with their splendid name; for the count is the representative
of the elder branch of the legitimatized sons of the last duke, the
famous Barnabo, who left none but natural children, some legitimatized,
others not so. It is a friendship which consoles me under many griefs.
But, unfortunately, I see her very seldom. Nothing is possible in a
life so busy as mine, and when one goes to bed at six to get up at
midnight. My system, my crushing obligations are all against my taking
any comfort. No one can come to see a workman who is fifteen hours at
his work, and I myself cannot fulfil any social duties. I see Madame
Visconti once a fortnight only, which is truly a grief to me, for she
and my sister are my only compassionating souls. My sister is in Paris,
Madame Visconti at Versailles, and I scarcely see them. Can that be
called living? You are in a desert at the farther end of Europe; I know
no other women in the world; I have the honour to assure you that no
one believes me overwhelmed by feminine hearts all at my orders, and
that I am, as to women, miserably neglected. What a savage joke! _Mon
Dieu!_ how stupid people are! There is in it a bitter sarcasm on the
hours when I sit gazing at the embers and thinking of my life with
bent head and wounded heart, and tears in my eyes; for to no one more
than to me would the daily happiness of nights and mornings be more
fitted. I have in my soul and in my character an equable quality which
would make a woman happy; I feel within me an infinite, inexhaustible
tenderness,--alas! without employment. Always to dream, always to wait,
to feel one's good days pass, to see youth torn out hair by hair, to
fold nothing in one's arms, yet find one's self accused of being a Don
Juan! A gross and empty Don Juan! There are moments when I envy my poor
sister Laurence lying these fifteen years in a coffin watered by our
tears.


February 14.

Adieu; I close this letter, placing in it for you as much affection as
in all the others put together. If "Vautrin" succeeds, the year 1840
will see me in your manor.

At this moment I am overwhelmed by work. I have in press "Pierrette,"
to which I must add another story to make the required two 8vo
volumes. I have a book to do for the "Presse," and also in the press
a novel in letters, which I shall call I don't know what, for "Sœur
Marie des Anges" is too long, and that is only one part of it. I must
finish all this to get my liberty of coming and going, which I have
never had since Geneva--no, I have never had but six weeks really to
myself, and for those escapades I paid dearly enough.

I am going to finish "La Torpille" and also "Les Lecamus" for the
"Siècle," and the last part of "Illusions Perdues," which is the end
of "Un Grand homme." And there is still the end of "Béatrix" to do, a
fourth Part, the last meeting of Calyste and Béatrix. In all, six works
to be done, besides two plays to be represented. What do you think of
that? Do you believe I have time to idle? Alas, I have not time to
think; I am swept onward by the current of labour as by a river. I have
scarcely a moment to write to you, and I take that from sleep. To yield
myself up to a thing of the heart is a luxury to me. How privileged are
the rich! And how little they know how to enjoy their facilities! I
think that money makes men dull. For the last three weeks I have hoped
that Rothschild would help me to arrange my affairs; I asked him to do
so. But bah! if I have to ask him twice, I prefer my poverty and toil.

Many tender things to you, dear. Present my remembrances and
friendships to all about you, and my wishes for the happiness of your
family. You have your wolves, I have my creditors; I wish I had no
wolves to encounter but your kind.

I hear that Colonel Frankowski, who took you the _cassolette_, is here.
Can I trust him with Anna's "Pierrette" and your pearls? Tell me;
answer this at once.

Adieu once more. Take all the flowers of sincere and faithful affection
here inclosed, pure, if any ever were so.

I open my letter to beg you not to write to M. de Custine. This is
imperative; you will soon understand why.



PARIS, March, 1840.

I am in bed, at my sister's house, ill since the day after the first
representation of "Vautrin." I left my bed to-day for the first time in
ten days. I have been well nursed by my sister. My illness, which is
nearly over, was an attack of cerebral neuralgia, caused by a draught
in a railway-carriage, which, combined with the mental condition in
which I was, gave me both a horrible fever, which I had, and the
atrocious sufferings of neuralgia.

You know, of course, by this time, that "Vautrin" has had the
misfortune to be forbidden by Louis-Philippe, who saw a caricature
of his own person in the fourth act, where Frédérick Lemaître plays
the part of an envoy from Mexico. Thus, I have but one representation
of the play to tell you of. The misfortune of the manager of the
Porte-Saint-Martin was that he was forced to let to unknown strangers a
large part of the house. The other part belonged partly to my enemies,
the journalists, and about a third to friends of mine and friends of
the manager and of the actors. I had expected some lively opposition;
but, in spite of hostile efforts, a great success in the sale of
tickets was obtained. That was all I wanted for the theatre and for
myself, when the prohibition came.[1]

Here, then, I was: Sunday, master of sixty thousand francs; Monday,
with nothing. First, all my agonies of money over; next, my position
more perilous than ever. Victor Hugo accompanied me to see the
minister, and we there acquired the certainty that the minister
himself counted for nothing in the prohibition, but Louis-Philippe
for all. Throughout this affair, at the representation and at the
ministry, Victor Hugo's conduct has been that of a true friend,
courageous, devoted; and when he heard I was ill he came to see me. I
have been well helped by George Sand and Mme. de Girardin. Frédérick
Lemaître has been sublime. But the affair of the likeness to Louis
Philippe was perhaps put forward against Harel, the manager of the
Porte-Saint-Martin, whose place he wanted. All this is still a mystery
to me. However it be, the blow has fallen. My situation is more painful
than it has ever been. Doctor Nacquart preaches vehemently a journey of
six weeks. Perhaps I can go to you.

Now, this is what has happened. The newspapers have been infamous; they
have said that the play was revolting in its immorality. I shall say
but one thing to you about that: read it! It may not be very good, but
it is eminently moral. Thereupon, the minister, to screen the royal
fury, made the pretext of immorality, which was cowardly and base.
One thing you may believe in, namely: terrible attacks on my part on
that tottering throne. It shall not have two farthings. I will be the
emulator and assistant of M. de Cormenin, and you shall see the effect
of my change from a peace footing to a war footing. I will have neither
truce nor armistice until I have driven----

[Footnote 1: Frédérick Lemaître, with or without satirical intention,
dressed himself as a Mexican general in a way to resemble Louis
Philippe, especially by wearing a wig rising to a point, giving his
head the famous pear shape for which that of Louis-Philippe was
ridiculed.--TR.]


May, 1840.

Nothing can better paint to you my life than this interruption. After
six weeks' delay I must finish a sentence left unfinished in my desk
without the possibility of returning to it. The end of that sentence
is: "claws of steel into their hearts." I resume my narrative.

They came and offered me indemnities; five thousand francs to begin
with. I blushed to the roots of my hair, and replied that I accepted no
alms; that I had earned two hundred thousand francs' worth of debts in
doing sundry masterpieces which counted for something in the sum total
of the glory of France in the nineteenth century; that I had been three
months rehearsing "Vautrin," during which time I might have earned by
other work twenty-five thousand francs; that a pack of creditors were
after me, but that if I could not pay them all, I did not care whether
I was hunted by fifty or a hundred of them; and that my dose of courage
to resist was the same. The director of the Beaux-Arts, Cavé, went
away, saying that he was full of esteem and admiration for me. "This is
the first time," he said, "that I have ever been refused." "So much the
worse," I replied.

Since I wrote you the two preceding pages my life has been that of
a stag at bay. I have come and gone about Paris helped by friends.
And now, without a farthing, I begin the fight once more. Frédérick
Lemaître will entice other actors, and I have obtained permission to
present a new play, in five acts, at one of the closed theatres; about
six weeks hence we shall re-appear, and then we shall see!



AUX JARDIES, May 10.

_Cara_, I have just received your last letter, and again I must
complain of the rarity of those letters. Oh! do not let what I have
written of my distresses keep you from writing to me monthly. If I
do not write to you as often in my periods of trouble, do not blame
my heart. I often make my prayer to Hope, turning my face toward the
Ukraine. Do not punish me for my confidences, which may, which must
sadden you. Alas! with what rapidity time is flying. How many white
hairs are in my head, faithful to all, even to toil.

You are laughing at me, and that is not right. Madame Visconti is an
Englishwoman, not an Italian; and I have no vanity in my friendships;
you know that. A man as busy as I am can attend very little to trifles.
Certainly, I will acknowledge that I am not without the vanity of love,
and I think that when we love we ought to love in all ways, and be very
happy to see _la dilecta_ carry off the palm from others in even the
smallest things,--her toilet, for instance. I should have all those
weaknesses, including blazons. But this was no ground on which to twit
me; look in your mirror, dress yourself very elegantly to-morrow, and
vindicate me, _cara_.

Every one comes up to me in Paris, admiring my courage as much and even
more than the rest. They thought me crushed, buried under my disaster,
and hearing that I am about to deliver battle once more, both friends
and enemies have been equally surprised.

Frédérick Lemaître rejected my drama of "Richard Cœur d'Éponge,"
saying that _paternity_ was a selfish sentiment which had little chance
of success with the masses. Moreover, he was not pleased with the
dénouement; and as one must only give him things to play that he likes
to play, I have been under the necessity of finding another play. It is
found at last, and I write to you in the midst of labours necessitated
by "Mercadet." "Mercadet" is the battle of a man against his creditors,
and the schemes he employs to escape them. It is exclusively a comedy,
and I hope this time to reach success, and also to satisfy literary
requirements.

Besides doing this comedy I am at this moment finishing "Le Curé de
village," one of the works to be included in the "Scènes de la Vie de
campagne," and by no means the least of them. But it needs much labour
to add a book to the "Lys dans la Vallée" and "Le Médecin de campagne."
However, I hope that "Le Curé" will surpass both; and you will think
it does yourself; for the "Curé de village" is the application of
Catholic repentance to civilization, just as the "Médecin de campagne"
is the application of philanthropy; and the first is far more poetic
and loftier. One is of man; the other is of God.

I shall do this year "Les Paysans" which has been composed these two
years, and the proofs are in my hands. But hunted as I am, without any
tranquillity, I cannot give myself up to my literary sympathies. I do
only that which is most pressing.

"Pierrette" is not yet out. You know why. Carried along by truth,
by the drama, it was necessary to speak of marriage and the results
of marriage. But you will see that all is kept to the most decorous
language. I don't know when it will please the publisher to bring out
the book. Wait for the Paris edition of both "Pierrette" and "Vautrin;"
ask Bellizard for the third edition; that is the only good one, and it
has a scene added.

I hope to publish this year a complete edition of the four Parts of the
"Études de Mœurs," and I have before me still to do the "Scènes de la
Vie politique" and "Scènes de la Vie militaire;" two rather long and
very difficult portions. It will take me at least six years to get to
the end of them.

I have great need to-day to feel my wounds nursed and healed, to be
able to live without cares at Les Jardies, and to pass my days with
my work and a woman. But it seems that the history of all other men
will never be other than a romance for me. Debts are a burden under
which I must succumb. Since the reckoning I gave you in Geneva--do you
remember?--nothing has changed; I have lived, and I have marked my
place, that is all. I have sustained myself on the surface of the waves
by swimming. God grant that I may not go under! but you will pray for
my soul's rest, will you not?

I leave you for "Mercadet."


May 15.

This is the evening of my Catholic fête, and four days hence is my
birthday. I have never, since I lived, seen a fête on those days;
no one has ever wished me returns of them, except once, when Madame
de Castries, the first year of our acquaintance, sent me the most
magnificent bouquet I ever saw. Therefore I am always sad on these
days. My mother cares little for me. I am so busy I have always told
my sister not to keep our fêtes, and there has never been any one else
to fête me. I do not count Madame de Berny, for that was a daily fête.
But then, from 1822 to 1832 my life was exceptional. Chance has acted
towards me as fate with those fantastic animals of the desert who
have but a few rare joys in their life, and die without perpetuating
themselves. This is how it was that the unicorn became a lost species,
and why that sublime painter of "Chastity," Il Pontormo, has placed a
unicorn beside that beautiful emblematical figure. I will own to you in
your ear, that I would rather, by far, have happiness than fame; that I
would give all my works to be happy as I see certain fools being happy.

Believe, dear, that in what I said to you about not writing to the rue
de La Rochefoucauld, there was a reason superior to all pettiness. That
person is about to publish a book such as he published on England, and
I believe it will be terrible [de Custine's book on Russia]. I cannot
tell you more; your intelligence will do the rest. I am extremely glad,
knowing how things may turn, that he has not been in your regions.

The friendship of which I spoke to you, and at which you laugh
apropos of my dedication, is not all I thought it. English prejudices
are terrible, they take away an essential to all artists, the
_laisser-aller_, unconstraint. In the "Lys dans la Vallée," I explained
the women of that county in a few words, as I divined it in Lady
Ellenborough during the two hours I walked about her park, while that
silly Prince Schonberg was making love to her, and during dinner.

Each step I take in life gives me a profound respect for the past. I
cannot tell you all I feel on that subject, not here at least, but I
will at Wierzchownia, where you will see me appear unexpectedly; for I
look to your region as to an asylum for my sorrows on the day when they
become intolerable. So I am not sure whether you ought to desire to see
me, with the white staff in my hand and the wallet on my back.

I beg of you, write me at least once a month, and remember that no
letter of yours has ever gone without an answer. The autograph is from
Meissonier, who is reviving the Flemish school among us,--the painter
of "Le Fumeur," "Le Liseur," and "La Partie d'échecs."



AUX JARDIES, June, 1840.

_Mon Dieu!_ what intervals between your letters, dear! If you knew what
uneasiness you give me, how often I spend hours with my elbows on the
table and my chin in my hands, asking myself what has happened to you.
And the visions far beyond sight! As for me, I have my excuse for the
months that separate my letters: either I have suffered beyond measure,
or I have worked enormously, or I have had some of those deplorable
affairs of which you know nothing.

It is now twenty days that I have suffered much with a species of
cholerine, or inflammation of the bowels, caused by an increase of
anxieties and labour; for the one leads to the other. I have written
the comedy in five acts, "Mercadet;" but Frédérick wants changes.
The interests which are fighting each other over the corpse of the
Porte-Saint-Martin prevent the provisional opening which the minister
had granted me; so the three or four hopes which had been successively
lighted are successively extinguished. In these last hopes, these
last efforts, my energy has broken down, and, at this moment I am
not worth an insect pinned to the card-board of a naturalist's box. I
am over-burdened with toil, obligations, business, till I no longer
recognize myself, and a life so embarrassed as mine no longer interests
me. This is strictly the fact. I would offer half my burden to any
benevolent passer-by. If you know a woman who needs to exercise great
faculties, who is tired of a monotonous life, who desires a position in
which there is much to combat and to conquer, who would be enticed by
the first campaign in Italy, who is thirty-six to forty years of age,
and has the wherewithal to fight with, send her to me; I will occupy
her.

Joking apart; I am very lonely when my brain ceases to work, or lies
down to rest. There is something humiliating, in the thought that a
trifling inflammation of insignificant viscera prevents the exercise of
our highest powers.

I have "Le Curé de village" to finish and a crowd of other things.
"Pierrette" is delayed for the preface by the publisher, I don't know
for what reason. The business of publishing books has become so bad
that I believe not ten volumes will be written in the next two years.
Belgium has ruined French literature. What _ungenerosity_ in those who
read us! If every one had refused the Belgian editions and insisted, as
you have, on the French editions, if only two thousand persons on the
continent had acted thus, we should have been saved. But Belgium has
sold already some twenty to thirty thousand copies. This evil will end
by force of evil. Meantime our poets starve or go mad.


June 21.

To go to see you, to go down the Rhine, to see Prussia and Saxony is
in me the desire of a lover, of a nun, of a child, of a young girl, of
all that is most vehement. But my interests are so threatened and I am
so poor that travel is forbidden me. Oh! you do not know how much there
is of longing, of repressed desires and wishes in what I now write
to you, or how many times my imagination and my heart have made that
journey.

Your last letter came in the midst of my cruel trouble, and I could not
answer you immediately. Our two existences, one so tranquil and deep,
the other so foaming and rapid, flow ever parallel; but that which
afflicts me grievously is that there is no cohesion. When thought has
constantly traversed space, when a thousand times it has filled the
void, one feels that this is not all. Something, I know not what, is
wanting, or rather, I know too well. These wings incessantly spread
and folded cause suffering; it is not lassitude, it is worse. Violent
desires possess me at times to quit all, to begin some other thing than
this present life, like children quitting play. I would like to know
if you too have these impulses of soul; I ask you to tell me because I
know that you are true, and above the pettiness of vanity, which makes
people drape themselves for themselves. But you will answer me by some
religious turn to things celestial, or by a blasting phrase against
our human nature. Yet I would not take from your religion what the eye
takes from a mirror as we use it, for it is one of the greatest charms
of your heart and mind. I never lay down a letter from you without
believing in something divine, and I will not tell you now of the
regrets that then assail me at the intolerable idea of our separation.
It seems to me that all would be well with me if the divinity were near
me.

I entreat you, write me every fortnight; you live in solitude, without
so much to do; it would be easy for you; and when one knows that one
does good to a poor being who has no one and who can thus be comforted,
is not that a work of charity?


June 30.

I shall send this letter, having nothing more to tell you of my
affairs, though much to add on my grief at your abandonment.


July 3.

I have your letter, number 55, and I answer its questions. _Primo_:
I have not received the picture of Wierzchownia; no, I have received
nothing, absolutely nothing. _Secundo_: Borget is in China. _Tertio_:
I forgot to tell you of M. de Custine; but he was superb at the
representation of "Vautrin." He had a proscenium box and applauded
vehemently; he behaved in the most superior way. If I told you not to
write to the rue de La Rochefoucauld it was because in that street a
book is being written which will be terrible, and I do not want you
to commit the slightest imprudence. There will be anger; all the more
justifiable because _they_ have been very well received. My friendship
saw danger ahead, and signalled it to you; believe me as to this.

I thank you from the bottom of my soul for your letter, but I am in
despair to know that you were ill while I was blaming you for not
writing. Solicitude at a distance is often injustice. Yes, I am very
willing that "Les Paysans" should be for M. Hanski if I write it. I
am at the end of my resignation. I believe that I shall leave France
and carry my bones to Brazil, in a mad enterprise, which I choose on
account of its madness. I will no longer bear the life I lead; enough
of useless toil! I shall burn my letters, all my papers, leave nothing
but my furniture and Les Jardies, and depart; confiding a few little
things that I value to my sister's friendship. She will be a faithful
dragon to those treasures. I will give a power of attorney to some
one; I will leave my works to be managed by others, and go to seek the
fortune that is lacking to me here. Either I shall return rich, or no
one shall ever know what becomes of me. This is a very fixed project
in my mind, which I shall put into execution this winter resolutely,
without mercy. My work can never pay my debt. I must look to something
else. I have not more than ten years left of real energy, and if I
do not profit by them I am a lost man. You are the only person who
will be informed of this decision. Certain circumstances may hasten my
departure. Nevertheless, however rapid may be the execution of this
plan, you shall receive my farewell. A letter from Havre or Marseille
will tell you all. This project has not been formed without sad hours
of days and nights. Do not think that I could renounce a literary
life and France without the most frightful wrenching. But poverty is
implacable, and if I go farther it will become shameful, intolerable.

I know that what I write will give you infinite pain; but is it not
better to tell you of it and explain my reasons, than leave you to hear
it brutally from the newspapers? But first I shall try a last throw of
the dice, my pen aiding; If that succeeds, I may pull through for the
time being. Perhaps I might be able to go and bid you farewell; perhaps
there are chances that I could rest three months with you, instead of
resting three months with Madame Carraud.

Ah! dear, you don't know what it is, after writing fifteen volumes
in fifteen months, to do sixteen acts of plays--"Vautrin," "Pamela
Giraud," "Mercadet"--uselessly; for there is no longer any hope of
opening the Porte-Saint-Martin. Lawsuits, battling over a coffin,
prevent that, The Français is closed three months for repairs. The
Renaissance is dead. There is no theatre where Frédérick can play. I
tried the Vaudeville in its new building, but the manager has no money.

You ask me for details about Victor Hugo. Victor Hugo is an extremely
brilliant man; he has as much wit as poesy. He is most fascinating
in conversation, a little like Humboldt, but superior, and admitting
more dialogue. He is full of bourgeois ideas. He execrates Racine, and
considers him a secondary man. He is crazy in that direction. There is
more of good than of evil in him. Though the good is an outcome of
vanity, and though all things are deeply calculated in him, he is, in
the main, a charming man, besides being the great poet that he is. He
has lost much of his quality, his force, and his value by the life he
leads.


August, 1840.

I have attempted a last effort; I am doing, by myself alone, the "Revue
Parisienne," just as Karr does "Les Guêpes."[1] The first number has
appeared. I postpone the execution of my project on Brazil. One loves
France so well! I will bear up. I am going to undertake the "Scènes de
la Vie militaire." I shall begin with Montenotte, and shall, no doubt,
go, in September or October, to the region about Nice, Albenga, and
Savona, and examine the ground where those fine manœuvres took place.

This letter has been lying two months on my table. It has been hindered
by so many matters! But at last it goes, bearing to you the testimony
of an affection always on the morrow of our meeting on the Crêt, and
eight years old.

A thousand tender regards and a thousand more. I am writing politics,
and posing as the friend of Russia. May God bless you! The Russian
alliance is much in my mind. I hate the English.

"Pierrette" is about to appear. You can let Anna read it, for all you
say. There is nothing "improper" in it.

[Footnote 1: Three numbers alone appeared: July 25, August 25,
September 25. Some of his best criticism, that on Cooper and Stendhal,
was in it; also the tale of "Z. Marcas," etc. The first number begins
thus: "We have always thought that nothing was more interesting, comic,
and dramatic than the comedy of government." See Édition Définitive,
vol. xxiii., pp. 567-785.--TR.]



SÈVRES, October 1, 1840.

Dear countess, I have this moment received your last letter. _Mon
Dieu!_ what can I say to you? All that it contains of kind, expansive,
and consoling is enough to make one accept worse miseries than mine, if
such existed. I have only sad things to reply to sad things.

In the first place, I had completely settled the project of going
to spend the winter with you; but my lawyer opposed it with wise
reasons--that do not satisfy me. Yes, I dreamed of seven or eight
months' peace and tranquillity, constant work, but without fatigue,
complete forgetfulness of all my tortures of all kinds. My arrangements
were made; I was to see Berlin and Dresden, and then go to you. Well,
it is all put off. Your presentiment was true. All _was_ to have taken
place; I felt a joy so infinite that nothing can express it. But it
would be, alas! mad and imprudent. My affairs are in too bad a state. I
spike my cannon, I retreat, to return in force. I will explain all this
in detail.

But, first of all, I must answer what you asked me, Which made me
smile, for I thought that you did not need to ask it; you ought to
have felt sure of that. Yes, I will never take any extreme resolution,
in whatever way it be, without first letting you know of it. When
I abandon myself, as they say, to the grace of God, I will begin
by abandoning myself to the grace of your Highness, like a good
moujik. You have precedence of God; for I confess to you, to my great
detriment, that I love you much more than him. You will scold me, but
why should I lie? I shall skip about your lands of Paulowska with you,
reading to you. For a nothing I'd make myself Russian, if--But the
_if_ is too long to unravel. All is not said about my journey; they
have made me abandon it--but I have not abandoned it. It depends a good
deal on finance, and the outcome of political affairs, for we are
furiously at war. I can't understand why an understanding is not come
to.

If you knew what it is in the midst of my agitated life to get a letter
from you, especially such a letter as I have just received, oh! you
would write me oftener, you would tell me fully all you do and all you
think.

By this time you must have received "Vautrin" and "Pierrette."
"Pierrette" is a diamond. In another twenty days the "Curé de village"
will be out, but lopped. I had not time to finish the book. It lacks
precisely all that concerns the _curé_, the amount of a volume, which
I shall write for the second edition [it was never written]. The
publisher and I could not come to an understanding on this increase of
volumes.


November 16, 1840.

Precisely one month and a half interval! And so many things to tell you
that I can't tell you; it would take volumes. Perhaps this fact will
enlighten you: From the time you receive this letter write to me at the
following address: "Monsieur de Brugnol, rue Basse, No. 19, Passy, near
Paris." I am here, in hiding for some time. Nevertheless, if, in the
meantime, you have addressed me at Sèvres, I shall get the letters.

Dear countess, I had to move very hastily and hide myself here, where I
am. But, as Marie Dorval says, money troubles are mere vexations; it is
only in the things of the heart that grief and misery are. Though all
goes badly with me, financially speaking, all goes well, for I'm going
to Russia; I'm going to see you as soon as I can earn the money for the
trip. I hope to leave for Berlin in February; I shall stay a month in
Berlin, fifteen days in Dresden, and be with you by the middle of April.

I have taken my mother to live with me, and I cannot leave home without
leaving the household provided-for for a year. It is probable that I
shall stay, June and July, in Saint-Petersburg, and return to you a
second time in the autumn.

During the period when this letter has lain, begun but unfinished,
among my papers (which have been for the past month in boxes, mixed
up with those of my whole library), I have received a letter from the
banking-house of Rougemont and Löwenberg, telling me to send there for
the picture you announced to me. So, be at ease on that subject, as
well as on the other subjects that interest us, about which you write
superfluous things.

It goes without saying that if I earn my ducats more quickly than I
expect, I shall start the earlier. I begin to feel a deep execration
for my dear country. You don't know what a bear-garden it is; I should
like Holland better, I think,--the most unliterary country in the
world. We will talk about this, dear, before long, and there's enough
in it for more than one evening. _Mon Dieu!_ how long it is since I
have seen you! It seems to me a dream to know within myself that I am
starting, going,--that every step will be bringing me nearer to you!
I have recovered strength for the work I am doing at this moment, in
thinking that it will give me liberty to go to Germany, and to find you
at the end of my errand.

I am just now finishing "Le Curé de village;" it is a great thing,
which occupies me much.

My last efforts have been poisoned by sufferings beyond the measure
of those that a man can bear; but I have neither time nor strength to
tell you anything about them. It must be for later. I can only send
you this letter, written in the course of nearly two months--for it is
now November 26; and provided it tells you my final decision, that's
enough, I think; but there are many things beneath that decision.

No longer adieu, dear, but _à bientôt_, for three months _is soon_. I
shall write you once, or twice, between now and the time I take the
steamer. A thousand tender regards, a thousand good hopes, and all
that a long attachment brings of gracious thoughts and flowers long
compressed in the depths of the soul. Many things in your last letter
did me good, of which I will not speak to you; but I did not think you
had so much persistence, or so much will. When you show me that the
excellent advice I gave you in Geneva has been followed, I quiver all
over.

All kind remembrances to those whom I know among the many who surround
you, and many things to M. Hanski.

You have again harped on the "elegant empire"---Coquette! but you make
me smile rather sadly.

There is one piece of serious news with me. I have taken my mother to
live with me. An increase of trouble and work. But!--


December 16, 1840.

At last I have been able to go to Rougemont and Löwenberg and obtain
the picture of Wierzchownia. I brought home, myself, the box made of
those northern woods, which, on being broken, exhaled such delicious,
enchanting odours that they gave me a sort of nostalgia. If you burn
such wood as that it must be a sensuous delight to stir your fire; more
than a pleasure. The picture has been injured; all journeys, though
they may form youth, hurt pictures. But, dearest of dears, the canvas
is immense; we have no spaces large enough in our honeycomb cells that
are called in Paris apartments. I shall put the original at Les Jardies
(if I can keep that place), and I will have a reduced copy made by
my dear Borget, who has just returned from China, and is working for
the Salon this year; thus I can have it before my eyes in my study.
I have had much pleasure in contemplating that picture; but you never
told me that a river ran before your lawn, nor that you had a Louvre.
It all seems very lovely, very beautiful, very fresh. The buildings
are elegant; we have nothing better here. What melancholy in the
background! How one divines the steppes and a country without a rise!
You did well; it was a good action to send me the likeness of your
dwelling; but I would also like a view of Paulowska.

Dear, it does not lessen my desire to go and see you, which I shall
put into execution. I am working night and day to arrange my affairs
here, and make a purse for my journey. You will see me, some fine day,
landing on that charming bridge.

This is only a little line to tell you that my eyes will be forever on
your windows, on the columns of your peristyle, and, while examining my
ideas, I shall be walking on that lawn.

"Le Curé de village" will be out in a few days; "Les Mémoires de deux
jeunes Mariées" are nearly finished. My lawyer, a man of admirable
character, maintains my debt by legal process [_maintient ma dette par
la procédure_]. I shall give two plays and a quantity of articles. I
shall leave my proofs to be corrected by friends in my absence, for a
dozen volumes will be re-issued during my travels.

Perhaps I shall come to you an Academician; but certainly with the
satisfaction of having published "Le Curé de village," which is one of
the stones of my pediment. I shall bring that work with me. I would
like to know to whom I shall address myself to avoid all annoyance at
the frontier regarding my manuscripts. Do you think I ought to write
to Saint Petersburg, or will a few words from Pablen, your ambassador,
suffice? I should like to obtain information about this because I would
then bring you my manuscripts.

When I saw your cage, it seemed to me it was mine, and I ought to be
living in it. You have made me very happy, and you must have had a
presentiment of my pleasure when you asked me so often if the picture
had arrived.

Yesterday, December 15, one hundred thousand persons were in the Champs
Élysées. A thing happened that would make one believe that natural
effects had intentions: at the moment when the body of Napoleon entered
the Invalides, a rainbow formed above that building. Victor Hugo has
written a sublime poem, an ode, on the return of the Emperor. From
Havre to Pecq both banks of the Seine were black with people, and all
those populations knelt as the boat passed them. It was more grand
than the Roman Triumphs, he was recognizable in his coffin; the flesh
was white; the hand speaking. He is the man of prestige to the last;
and Paris is the city of miracles. In five days one hundred and twenty
statues were made, seven or eight of them very fine, also one hundred
triumphal columns, urns twenty feet high, and tiers of seats for a
hundred thousand spectators. The Invalides was draped in violet velvet
powdered with bees. My upholsterer said to me, to explain the thing:
"Monsieur, in such cases, all the world upholsters."[1]

Well, adieu. I work, and every hour lost delays my journey. I send you
to-day the most precious of autographs, for Frédérick Lemaître never
writes a line; he is as great as Talma.

All tender and gracious homage. My regards and remembrances to those
about you. You ought by this time to have "Pierrette" complete.

[Footnote 1: This relates to the return of Napoleon's body from Saint
Helena. The translator of this volume was present. The Champs Élysées
from the Arc de Triomphe to the Place de la Concorde were lined with
those statues, between which were the urns, filled with burning
incense. As the catafalque (all gold, and draped with violet gauze)
paused beneath the Arch, the populace fell on their knees, believing
that Napoleon would rise from the dead. The remnant of the Old Guard
followed him on foot. The weather was so terribly cold that fifteen
hundred persons were said to have died of it; three hundred of them
English.---TR.]



March, 1841.

Dear countess; I have received your dear letter number 57, dated
December 20, 1840, and if I reply rather late it is that I have been so
busy.

I cannot leave till I have settled my affairs in a manner to have a
truce, and I have still many things to do for that: three volumes to
write and a comedy; but patience! some day I shall take my flight. Do
not fear; when I start, I will write to you from each town in Germany,
where I make any stay.

"Le Curé de village" has appeared. It is a book that has cost me much
time; you will see that when you read it. It is not yet finished, nor
perfected.

I work immensely, and I have scarcely the time to write to you. Last
month I wrote a novel for the newspaper "Le Commerce," entitled "Une
Ténébreuse Affaire," and the beginning of a book called "Les Deux
Frères," for the "Presse." I have also "Les Lecamus" in the "Siècle,"
which is a study on Catherine de' Medici, in the style of the "Secret
des Ruggieri." At this moment I am doing a novel for "Le Messager," and
finishing for my publisher "Les Mémoires de deux jeunes Mariées." That
is a good deal of work, all that!--without counting nonsense like "Les
Peines de cœur d'une chatte Anglaise," and a "Note" to the Chamber of
Deputies on literary property, etc. So, to win a moment of liberty I
work like a poor wretch; but I look at the promised land: that balcony,
the corner of the house, the study for work!

Before I have Les Jardies painted for you I must know if that cottage
remains to me, if I shall not be despoiled of it.

When I start, I shall take care to avoid being stopped at the
custom-house, by taking nothing or almost nothing with me, and
fortifying myself with introductions; be easy in mind about that. I
think I shall be able to start in May, and reach you in June or July.

My traveller, Borget, is working for fame on his landscapes; but I am
very much afraid he has not genius, and we have so many _talents_ that
one more will not be remarked.

You do not tell me anything of all that interests me most,--your
health, your person, yourself; and that is very wrong. Is it to make
me come and see for myself? I don't need that. You know well that I
am kept here by my obligations, which are enormous, and the weight of
which will end by dragging me under.

I am grieved to know that months must pass before you receive "Le Curé
de village," for that is one of the books which I should like you to
read as soon as it is finished. A copy has gone to Henri de France with
these words: "Homage of a faithful subject." You will read a certain
passage in favour of Charles X., which will prevent the book from
obtaining the Montyon prize.

They tell me there is a cousin of yours here, but he has not looked me
up any more than your brother did. George Sand, whom I go to see quite
often, could have told him where to find me. This cousin seems to me
a simpleton, who swallows a quantity of nonsense about me, if I may
judge by what I am told of him. You must admit, dear, that your brother
has been wilfully mistaken; for George Sand and I continue pretty good
friends, and I see her about once every month. I lead a very retired
life on account of my work, but I am not unfindable to my friends.


March 15.

I have just returned from George Sand, who has never seen or known
Comte Adam Rzewuski. I stirred her up and questioned her with much
pertinacity; and as for the last three years she has had Chopin for
friend, that illustrious Pole, who remembers Léonce and his brother
[cousins of Madame Hanska], would certainly have known your dear Adam.
Besides which, Grzymala, the lover of Mme. Z..., and Gurowski and all
the Poles who cram her rooms would surely know that Adam was Adam
Rzewuski. Do not show that you know this, for men are terrible in a
matter of self-love, and you would make him my enemy. George Sand did
not leave Paris at all last year. She lives at number 16 rue Pigalle,
at the end of a garden, and over the stables and coach-house which
belong to the house on the street. She has a dining-room in which the
furniture is carved oak. Her little salon is _café-au-lait_ coloured,
and the salon in which she receives has many superb Chinese vases
full of flowers. There is always a jardinière full of flowers. The
furniture is green; there is a side table covered with curiosities;
also pictures by Delacroix, and her own portrait by Calamatta. Question
your brother, and ascertain if he saw these things, which are striking
and quite impossible not to see. The piano is magnificent and upright,
in rosewood. Chopin is always there. She smokes cigarettes, and _never_
anything else. She rises at four o'clock; at four Chopin has finished
giving his lessons. You reach her rooms by what is called a miller's
staircase, steep and straight. Her bedroom is brown; her bed two
mattresses on the floor, in the Turkish fashion. _Ecco, contessa._ She
has the pretty, tiny little hands of a child. And finally, the portrait
of the lover of Mme. Z... as a Polish castellan, three-quarter length,
hangs in the dining-room, and nothing would more strike a stranger's
eye. If your brother can bring himself out of that, you will know the
truth. But let yourself be fooled--Oh! travellers!

If you only knew how many Balzacs there are at the different carnival
balls in Paris. What adventures I shoulder! This year I have cheated
everybody, for I have not set foot in any of them.

I hasten to send you this scrap of a letter, to acknowledge yours,
and assure you that my desire to start increases. What your brother
is right about is the incredible influence of the atmosphere of
Paris; literally, one drinks ideas. At all times, all hours, there is
something new; whoso sets foot on the boulevard is lost; he must amuse
himself.


March 25.

Your cousin, or M. Hanski's cousin, is named Gericht or Geritch. I
don't know who they all are who call themselves your cousins, but this
I know, you have no more cruel enemies; they loudly exclaim at my
friendship for you, and make much noise about it; while I am living
in my corner and have not uttered your name ten times. When an exiled
princess said to me, "We all know you love Poland, M. de Balzac," I
answered, "It would be difficult not to love _your_ country."

But I am very silly to be irritated by such things! The world is the
world. Some of your "cousins" say such things as this, accepting all
the calumnies they hear about me: "Ah! if my cousin knew what M. de
Balzac has done!" They cannot know that I write you my life very nearly
as it passes. However, this has wounded me deeply, and will, no doubt,
cause you pain. There is another cousin of yours here, I am told. This
M. Gericht is very proud of our illustrious friendship, but the other
cousin is much grieved by it. So be it! Is it not enough to make one
hate that smoke called fashion or fame, whichever you like?

I tell you these silly trifles because I have just been thrashed by
them; and every time I go out I am wounded by something of the kind,
which, however, does not concern you, and therefore I bear it better
than what touches you.

That silly Princess R... came here, and does not distinguish between
Vienna and Paris; she has, perhaps, the same _bonhomie_, but Paris is
not _bonhomme_. There are, as your brother told you, ideas in the very
air, and an animation which is not to be seen in any other people or
any other capital. Imagine what a city is in which superiorities of all
kinds are collected.

I made George Sand repeat to me that she had never seen a Pole or a
Russian of your brother's name. I spent, two days ago, a charming
evening with Lamartine, Hugo, Madame d'Agoult, Gautier, and Karr at
Madame de Girardin's. I have not laughed so much since our days in
Geneva.[1]

Adieu, dear; _à bientôt_. I shall start for Germany, in all
probability, in May, and I hope, after so much toil, to have well
earned seeing you and saying, _Sempre medesimo_.

[Footnote 1: See Lamartine's portrait of Balzac at Mme. de Girardin's;
Memoir to this edition, pp. 123-125.--TR.]



PASSY, June 1, 1841.

This night, dear countess, I have seen you in a dream, in a manner most
accurate, most precise, and I renew the fable of "Les Deux Amis." I
write to you instantly. I was frightened by seeing you so distinctly;
then I woke, went to sleep again, and read a good, long letter from
you. You were not changed; and I was in ecstasies at seeing you thus.
You were both far and near; I did not even have the pleasure of
pressing your hand.

Did this come from my speaking of you to a Russian lady the evening
before, at the house of the daughter of the late Prince Koslowski,--a
Mademoiselle Crewuzki, who was in Vienna when we were there, and who
tried to prove to me that you were not beautiful (she is hideous)?
Or is it that a letter from you is on its way to me? The same thing
happened to Madame de Berny; whenever I wrote to her, she dreamed of
the letter. That thought overcame me just now, at my desk, before
beginning to write to you.

Alas! dear, no journey; at any rate, not for another year at least. So
many events have happened that I know not how to relate them all. I sum
them up.

When I wrote to you, "I am coming," I doubted the possibility of living
in France amid the dreadful struggles which consumed my life; and I
had the idea of going to you in Petersburg and renouncing France. But
a last effort has drawn me out of the claws of the publisher to whom I
owed a hundred thousand francs. By working day and night, and pledging
myself for six months to the labours of a literary Hercules, I have
paid him that money.

I do not owe more than one hundred and fifty thousand; and though age
is advancing on me, and work becomes each day more toilsome, I conceive
the hope of ending this horrible debt in eighteen months by putting
myself in a situation which my lawyer wishes me to hold, in order not
to be sued and not to pay more costs. "Les Jardies" will be sold to a
_locum tenens_, and when my debts are paid I shall recover it. On the
other hand, my mother has ruined herself for my brother Henry, who
is now in the colonies, and she lives with me. Besides which, I have
almost my majority for the Academy. All these things made me renounce
the project of going to Russia, and I have signed an agreement to do
ten new volumes the coming year. I have also to write articles promised
to the "Presse" and the "Siècle." And finally, _cara_, I have signed a
bargain for a complete edition of my works, to be managed by a great
publishing house, printed with the utmost luxury, and sold at a low
price.

All these things, so great, so important to me, have been settled since
my last letter. But I have not worked, published, and attended to
affairs with impunity.

Do not be vexed with me. For two months I literally have not had time
to write or do anything but what I have done. Les Jardies were seized,
a creditor was about to have them sold; I had to get fifty thousand
francs in a month, and I did get them. I had to publish my books and
articles, and attend to business without money--absolutely without
money. It was raining incessantly; I went on foot from Passy to do my
business, tramping all day and writing all night. _Primo_: I did not
go mad. _Secundo_: I fell ill. I had to travel. As soon as the result
was obtained I was seized with an inflammation of the blood which
threatened to attack the brain. I went to Touraine for two weeks; but
on my return Dr. Nacquart condemned me to a bath of three hours a day,
to drink four pints of water, and take no food, inasmuch as my blood
was coagulating. I am just out of this barbarous but heroic treatment,
with complexion clear, refreshed, and ready for new struggles.

That is the summing up of my history; for if I had to go into details
it would take volumes.

Dear, I have not received from you the least little word since your
number 57, dated December 29. Oh! how wrong that is, when you are
loved as you are by me, when you alone are in this heart with poverty
and toil--two incorruptible guardians. Why have you abandoned me thus
when you are my only thought, the end and the bond of so much work,
when, ever since I have had Wierzchownia before me in painting, I have
found nothing in my fields of thought that I did not seek on the waters
of your river, beneath your windows, among your roses and on your
carpets of green grass? Oh! has remorse never touched your heart? Has
no thought ever come to you in a sparkle from your candle at night,
saying, "He thinks of you!" M. Hanski himself, has he never said to
you, "Why don't you write to that poor fellow?"

Has nothing pleaded for the poor unhappy one, the sufferer, the
night-watchman, the maker of books and articles, the pretended
poet--for me, in short, for the traveller to Neufchâtel, Geneva, and
Vienna, who is not present before you now because the journey costs
money, and money and publishing are two irreconcilable terms.

Yes! six months without writing to me! I have always had good reasons
for my silence; but you have none for yours; you ought to write me
three times against my once, and it is I who write twice to your once!
_Ingrato cuore!_

My excuses are these: I have published "Le Curé de village" (still
incomplete). I have done three quarters of "Les Mémoires de deux jeunes
Mariées." I have published "Une Ténébreuse Affaire." "Les Lecamus,"
"Les Deux Frères" and I am about to publish "Les Paysans;" I have done
many useless works for a living; what I call useless because they are
outside of my real works, and therefore, except for the money earned,
lost time. And finally, between now and a month hence, my Work will be
published in parts under the title of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE, and I must
correct at least three times five hundred _feuilles_ of compact type!

Ah! dear, the woman beloved, a little bread in a corner, tranquillity,
moderate work--that is my hope. I know it is enormous in one respect,
but it is humble for the rest. Why is it not granted? God wills it not;
but I cannot see his reasons.

Dear, here are my present hopes and my programme. I am about to write
a book for _the prix_ Montyon, which will pay a third of my debt.
Another third will be paid by the theatre; the last third by my usual
work. You will come to Baden and I shall see you there, for I could
absent myself _one_ month; but two or three, no, not under present
circumstances.

My sister still wants to marry me. She has among her friends a
goddaughter of Louis-Philippe, daughter of that Bonnard who brought up
the King of the French. I laughed so that my sister was speechless.
"In the first place," I said to her, "I will not marry any woman under
thirty-six, preferably forty, inasmuch as I am forty-two."

Apropos of that, I expected a letter, from you May 16, Saint Honoré's
day, or the 20th, my birthday, and I had palpitations for nothing at
post-time. _Ingrato cuore!_ But you are loved _quand même_. During
these six months there have been moments when I fancied you were coming.

So Gurowski elopes with an Infanta and marries her! Oh! how much better
to be a fool like Gurowski than an intrepid traveller like me.

If you only knew what I would give to have a child. No, there are
moments when the fear of waking up old, ill, incapable of inspiring any
sentiment (and that is beginning) seizes me, and I almost go mad. I go
and walk alone in some solitary place, cursing life and our execrable
country--and yet the only one where it is possible to live.

I have here, before my eyes, your last letter of December 29, alas!
You were looking at a ray of sunshine thawing your windows; you saw
the past in that, and the future! Would to heaven that ray would come
to me. I await it with impatience--that ray, your letter, which shines
upon me from time to time. Six months' silence, a winter of the heart!
What has happened to you during all that time? Have you been ill? Are
you suffering? What? The mind and heart wander dolorously through all
the zones of supposition, doubt, anxiety.

If I were less ruined, less bound to give all my money to my lawyer, I
should go to see you, because I am ordered to go away for a time; but I
am only allowed five hundred francs' worth of liberty.

Well, adieu, dear; or rather, _à bientôt_. In spite of my promises,
always baffled by fate and misfortune, believe that the only thing I
desire is to go and see you. I will not talk of it any more. I will try
for it. Perhaps the very force of work may exact a longer rest than
fifteen days spent in Touraine by the combined commands of lawyer and
doctor. When I shall have finished bringing out the books which I must
still do for Souverain (that is, five volumes), I shall, no doubt, find
a moment. Do not be vexed with me for postponing this, to me, great
happiness; I had to do so for my interests. I had to rescue the hundred
thousand francs Les Jardies cost, and persevere in that great and noble
task--of paying debts. You owe me to my own despair, and now I have
begun to hope again. HOPE is, above all to me, a virtue; it is a duty,
not done without many tears shed secretly, which you do not see. God
owes me a great compensation, and among those he does send me I count
the pure benedictions your sweet hand wafts me with the adieus of your
dear letters.

A thousand wishes for the happiness of your dear Anna. My affectionate
compliments to all those I know about you, and my friendship to the
Count. I have not forgotten him among my dedications; he will find his
in the beautiful complete edition I am now preparing.

As for you, dear Elect Lady, the most adored among all my friendships,
preferred even to my natural affections, you who are before the sister,
and whom I shall ever hold in affection, I do not bid you farewell; I
offer you afresh all that is yours--but one cannot give one's self
twice.


June 30, 1841.

Dear countess, I cannot understand your silence. It is many days now
that I have looked for your answer. I have written to you twice since
I received your last letter, and I am a prey to the keenest anxiety.
These fears and uncertainties seize me in the midst of my work; I
interrupt it to ask myself where you are, and what you are doing.
Perhaps you have been elsewhere than at Wierzchownia; perhaps you have
only lately returned there. In short, I torment myself strangely, and
I have, in my laborious life, amid all my thoughts, one thought which
masters the rest and puts among them an anxiety that is truly dreadful,
for it attacks the sentiment by which I live.

I have succinctly related to you the business I have done, and how I
have drawn myself out of certain bad troubles. The physical and moral
fatigue which labours of all kinds caused me, made me make a little
journey of two weeks into Bretagne in April and a few days in May. I
returned ill, and spent the rest of the month in taking baths of three
hours to quell the inflammation that threatened me and in following a
debilitating regimen. No more work, not the slightest strength, and
I continued till the beginning of the present month in the agreeable
condition of an oyster. At last, Dr. Nacquart being satisfied, I began
to write again, and I have done "Ursule Mirouët," one of the privileged
books, which you will read, and I am now going to work on a book for
the _prix_ Montyon.

To relate to you my life, dear, is only to enumerate my labours, and
what labours! The edition of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE (that is the title of
the complete work, the fragments of which have, until now, composed the
works I have published) will take two years to bring out; it contains
five hundred folios of compact type. These I must read three times! It
is as if I had fifteen hundred folios [24,000 pages] of compact type to
read! And my regular work must not be allowed to suffer. My publishers
have decided to add to each Part a vignette. This general revision of
my works, their classification, the completion of the divers portions
of the edifice, give me an increase of work which I alone know, and it
is crushing.

Dear, this is what I shall have written this year: 1. "Le Curé de
village;" 2. "Une Ténébreuse Affaire;" 3. "Le Martyr calviniste;" 4.
"Le Ménage d'un Garçon;" 5. "Ursule Mirouët;" 6. The book for the
_prix_ Montyon. And besides those ten volumes I shall have written the
amount of two volumes in little detached articles; and I must also,
for my living, write two novels that are rather indispensable to the
part of my works which is to be first published, namely: "Scènes de la
Vie privée," which is to have twenty books.[1] That will make eighteen
volumes in all. Judge, therefore, of what I shall have done. I have
lived in ink, proofs, and literary difficulties to solve. I have slept
little. I have, I think, ended, like Mithridates, in being impervious
to coffee.

If my lawyer puts me, as to my affairs, in a tranquil state, I could
travel in September and October. I could go as far as the Ukraine for
a few days. But that depends entirely on my work; for all that the
publisher pays goes to my lawyer to settle my affairs, and for my
living I have only what the newspapers give me. So you can judge the
difficulty of working for two masters, two necessities.

I shall wait a few days before sending this letter, hoping that you
will have written to me. Since the last two pages were written I have
been present at Victor Hugo's reception [at the Academy], where the
poet deserted his colours and the Elder Branch, and tried to justify
the Convention. His speech has caused extreme pain to his friends.
He tried to caress parties; but that which might pass in shadow and
privacy never goes well in public. This great poet, this fine maker
of imagery, received his spurs, from whom?--Salvandy! The assemblage
was brilliant; but the two orators were both bad. Praises were given
to France, which I thought ridiculous. Let our pens be the masters
of the world of intellect, I desire it; but that we should say it of
ourselves, without contradictors, in our own Academy, is bad taste, and
it disgusts me.

I am worried about my affairs. I am forced to await the conclusion of
my lawyer's principal arrangement, which is to sell Les Jardies. The
sale takes place July 15th.

[Footnote 1: For complete bibliographical lists of Balzac's Works
of all kinds, with dates of publication, etc., see Memoir to this
translated edition, pp. 351-369.--TR.]


July 15.

Les Jardies were sold this morning for seventeen thousand five hundred
francs, having cost me a hundred thousand! Here I am, without house,
hearth, or home. A few days hence I shall begin to fulfil my last _pen_
obligations; there are but six volumes still to do, and then, having
neither house, nor furniture, nor prosecution to fear, I can travel!
But still I am separated from that travel by six volumes, and the
reprinting of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE, which would appear during my journey.
It seems hardly likely I could do the six volumes and four of the
reprints between now and October 15; however, I shall try.

No letter from you; my anxiety has reached the highest point. I
begin to yield myself to the most absurd ideas. I shall consult a
somnambulist to know if you are ill. A few days ago I had my fortune
told with cards by a very famous wizard. I had never seen one of
those singular phenomena. The man told me, after consulting his cards,
things of incredible accuracy, with particulars about my past life; and
he explained to me his prognostics for the future. This man, without
education, and extremely common, uses choice expressions the moment he
is with his cards. The man and the cards is another being to the man
without the cards. He told me--not knowing me from Adam--me, who did
not myself know at two o'clock that I should consult him at three, that
my life until to-day had been one continued series of struggles, in
which I had always been victorious. He also told me that I should soon
be married; which was my _great curiosity_.


July 16.

Ought I to send this letter? Ought I to wait longer? You have left two
letters from me without an answer; this will be the third. In the midst
of my toil, under which I bend, but do not break, this is a continual
anxiety which distresses me.

I have always the intention to pass part of the coming winter with
you; but all depends on the reprinting of my works, which becomes
problematical in spite of the fifteen thousand francs already paid
me for it. The affair seems to be heavy and difficult, and I live in
conferences with my lawyer and the three publishers, who want so many
guarantees that I believe I shall begin all over again the troubles of
the agreement I have just bought out, at a cost of one hundred thousand
francs.

You are very courageous if you have done all you said in your last
letter, and you must now see that I was right when I spoke to you of
the value that a woman ought to have in her own house--which is a
wholly French idea. For pity's sake, dear, send me a line the moment
you receive this letter, which I shall send off to-day. I have great
need to know how you are, what you are doing, whether you or any of
yours are ill; for surely nothing but illness could thus interrupt all
news between us. Remember that the corner of earth where Wierzchownia
is interests me more than all the other lands of the world put together.

I begin to weary extremely of my continual toil. It is now nearly five
years that I have not ceased to work; the wizard who told me I should
soon have my tranquillity must have lied.

Adieu, dear; all tender regards and remembrances across the spaces
which I too, sooner or later, will cross; with what pleasure none but
myself can know! But, for pity's sake, a word, a letter. I await it
with an impatience that so much delay has made a soul-sickness. The
wizard told me that within six weeks I should receive a letter which
would change all my life; and in the live combinations of cards which
he made, that fact reappeared in all of them. I will relate to you some
day that _séance_ and make you laugh heartily.

Adieu, _sempre medesimo_.



PARIS, September, 1841.

Dear countess, it is now nearly ten months since I have received any
letters from you; and this is the fifth letter I have written without
receiving any reply. I am more than anxious; I know not what to think.

This time, I have good news to tell you. _Primo_: I have at length
paid off the debt which crushed my life and my efforts. The hundred
thousand francs due to those with whom I made that fatal treaty of
1836 are paid. _Secundo_: Les Jardies are sold to a friend who will
keep them for me. _Tertio_: no one can any longer harass me; my debts
are fixed at a certain figure. I spend nothing, and, if I keep my
health and force, they will _all_ be paid in eighteen months. _Quarto_:
three firms of publishers, Dubochet, Furne, and Hetzel and Paulin,
unite to undertake the publication of all my works, a great number,
with engravings, to be sold cheaply. LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE is at last to
arise, beautiful, well corrected, and almost complete. My works will be
purchasable; for as they are now, no one knows where to buy them, or
has the money to do so; they have hitherto cost three hundred francs,
whereas now they will cost eighty and be well printed. This is an
affair which alone might pay my debts. But I do not count upon it; I
rely only on my pen and new works.

During this year I have written thirty thousand lines for the
newspapers. In 1842 I shall write forty thousand. I have, besides, a
comedy in five acts for the Théâtre-Français, not counting "Mercadet,"
which is always on the stocks. I have written this year, in all,
sixteen volumes. But in the spring, if my play is played, I shall go to
Germany and to you; for between now and then you will have told me why
you have punished me and deprived me of my bread. I could not travel
now; I must prepare enough volumes of my complete works, so that this
new publication might not suffer by my absence. I have to fill up my
frame-work. Many things are still lacking in the "Scènes de province"
and "Scènes Parisiennes." As for the "Scènes de la Vie politique,
militaire, and campagne," two-thirds are still wanting, and I must
finish them all in seven years, under pain of never doing LA COMÉDIE
HUMAINE,--which is the title of my history of society painted in action.

In the midst of all this business and toil, and I may say, _renascent
pains_, the grief that your silence causes is the greatest of all;
each day more poignant; and I no longer seek for the reasons of your
silence. I await them.

As soon as, through the devotion of Gavault (my lawyer, the solicitor
of the city of Paris), I saw that there was still a means to remain
in France and pull myself through my difficulties, and that I could
respond to his advances of money by pecuniary profits, I redoubled in
courage and I sacrificed the journey I was to have made to you. But
I told you so, instantly, in a letter telling you all my hopes. This
year, the _better_ has made long strides. I shall attain to--death
perhaps, but my last glance shall see the Romans fly!

How shall I explain to you that amid these triple battles I feel a cold
place in my heart; that I can no longer complain, or write to you; I
can only suffer! How many explanations have I given to your silence,
all either wounding or irritating! This letter leaves in September; you
will receive it in October or November. I cannot, therefore, receive
a reply to it before January. That will be four or five months more
of uncertainty and fears, amid the most terrible, most active, most
occupied life that there is in the world--for I move a world, and you
do not know what a Prometheus afoot, acting, with an unseen vulture
within his heart, is. I have moments when I cannot invent reasons for
your silence; I have reviewed them all and have found each more bitter
than the others.

This year I have worked through two hundred nights, and I must begin
another in the same way to conquer my liberty. Ah! they may well make a
goddess of her!

The address "M. de Brugnol, rue Basse No. 19, Passy, department of the
Seine," is always the direct and right address.



PARIS, September 30, 1841.

Dear countess, I have just received the letter you have sent me under
cover to Souverain, and I am amazed beyond measure. First of all, have
the charity to answer by return of mail the following questions:--

1. Did you address the letters which have been returned to you to M.
de Brugnol, rue Basse No. 19; Passy; or were they directed to Sèvres?

2. At what dates ought they to have reached me?

Your answer is of great importance to my tranquillity; for I must
discover through what causes your letters have not been delivered to me.

Nothing ever made such an impression on me as your little letter sent
through my publisher. I have more than suffered, I have been ill
from it. I have had a species of congestion of the head, which was,
apparently, the result of it. The letter you will have received a few
days before you receive this will paint to you my anxieties. When
putting it myself into the post, I spoke to the postmaster, telling
him that I had put four letters into his office to which I had had no
answer; and that never had my correspondence, lasting eight or nine
years, been thus interrupted; that I did not know whether my letters
were received, and I feared this might be on account of some error in
the prepayment of mine. He answered that if there had been an error it
was his affair and would not affect the delivery of the letters. But if
I had not received this letter through Souverain, or your answer to my
last in the needed time (two and a half months), I should have started,
dear, even if so rash a journey had stopped the species of prosperity
which Gavault, the lawyer, is introducing into my affairs. Imagine,
therefore, what a revulsion there was in my mind on reading your letter
so full of melancholy, of deep sadness, which shows me that _some evil
trick_ has been played, to repress which I have need of an answer to
the above questions.

Dear, and very dear, you must know that my activity the past year
has been cruel; I can only use that word. I have made an agreement
to write forty thousand lines in the newspapers from October, 1841,
to October, 1842; and if I obtain two francs and a half a line, all
my indebtedness will be cleared off, or nearly so, and I shall have
won an independence I have never had since I existed. I shall owe not
a sou nor a line to any one in the world. It is to that result that
I have immolated my dearest affections, and renounced that journey I
had planned. But it is impossible that after the coming winter I shall
not need some violent and long diversion, and in April I will go to
Germany, and beyond it, to you.

The sorrowful eloquence of your dear letter of a wounded heart made
me weep; my heart was wrung as I read, at its close, your assurances
of old affection, when in me all was the same as ever while you were
blaming me. These flashes of joy on learning that all our pain came
from neither you nor myself, and that amid this disaster, which has
darkened eight months of our life, we each had the same confidence
in the other--though you were saddened and I impatient, almost
unjust--were needed to send some balm into my heart. Must I again tell
you that you and my sister are the sole deities of my heart. It was,
dear, extreme misfortune which made me give you that hope of my visit.
But I have been stronger against excessive work than I expected. After
ten months of labour, to have written "Ursule Mirouët" in twenty days
is one of those things which printers and witnesses of that remarkable
effort will not believe. It has nothing analogous to it but "César
Birotteau."

Well! God owed me the joy, mingled with tears, that your letter brought
me; without it I might not have been able to do another like effort
this month, when I must give a rival to "Le Médecin de campagne." To
win the Montyon prize for 1842, I am now writing "Les Frères de la
Consolation." They talk of giving me the cross, for which I care very
little; it is not at forty years of age that it can give pleasure; but
I could not refuse Villemain.

"Les Mémoires de deux jeunes Mariées" will be out in a few days.
In another month I shall finish, in the "Presse," my story of "La
Rabouilleuse," the first part of which appeared under the title of "Les
Deux Frères."

I have great need to see Germany thoroughly in order to be able to
write the "Scènes de la Vie militaire;" and I shall go straight to
Dresden to view the battle-field.

The affair of the publication of my great work, under the title of
LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE in which all my compositions will be classed and
definitively corrected, is about to begin. In order to travel, I must
leave four volumes ready with my publishers, four _compact_ volumes.
The whole will be in twenty-eight volumes at four francs, with
illustrations.

Doesn't your head swim in reading me? Now you see where the travail
of my nights goes. And by the end of December I shall finish a comedy
called "Les Rubriques de Quinola." Do you feel what there is under all
this? There is _you_! Your friend must be a giant, a truly great man;
and it is with the greatest of men that I set up a rivalry. I hope that
when we meet again you will find the Honoré of Geneva much taller, that
you will not be so old as you say you are, and that after so much time
spent apart from each other we may have, both of us, a second youth.
Don't calumniate yourself, dear.

Borget, who has returned from China after making the tour of the world,
will reduce the Wierzchownia landscape and make a pretty picture of it.
Alas! it is still unframed in my study; you will not believe my poverty
till it is all over and I tell you about it. I suffer less on that
account than I have done, without as yet being at ease; I must still be
earning the bread of the morrow; but Gavault maintains with firmness
the plan formed for my release from debt and my freedom.

I no longer have Les Jardies, and I do not live under my own name;
consequently no more prosecutions and costs. I am in reality as
if I owed nothing; I am asked for nothing, and all my earnings are
accumulating in Gavault's hands without loss, until they reach the
total of my debt; and I live on three hundred francs a month at Passy.
There, dear. Ten more novels and two plays, if they succeed, will buy
me back Les Jardies and liberty. When once I reach that point, I shall
think of making myself a fortune equal to that I have earned to pay my
debts, and that will give me an income of twenty thousand francs a year!

After the sensation of grief your letter gave me came the unspeakable
pleasure of knowing you still my friend, though pained; but why not
have taken, dear, the following course on the return of the first
letter? What had you done with your wits? Has the heart no wits? At
any rate, put this into your beautiful head, behind that splendid
forehead: direct always to "M. de Balzac, Paris, _poste restante_."
Even a husband cannot obtain the letters for his wife; the post gives
them only to her without her husband; it writes to the person to whom
they are addressed to come and fetch them; and as the post is always
informed of my whereabouts, a letter _poste restante_ will always reach
me.

I cannot write to you, dear, oftener than once a month; but I will
never fail in that, unless from illness, or too hard labour. By the
end of October I may be able to send you, through Bellizard, the
original edition, fifty copies only being printed, of "Les Frères de la
Consolation."

January 5, 1842.

I have this instant received, dear angel, your letter sealed with black
[telling him of the death of M. Hanski, on November 10, 1841], and,
after reading it, I could not perhaps wish to have received any other
from you, in spite of the sad things you tell me about yourself and
your health. As for me, dear, adored one, although this event makes
me attain to that which I have ardently desired for nearly ten years,
I can, before you and God, do myself this justice, that I have never
had in my heart any other thing than complete submission, and that I
have not, in my most cruel moments, stained my soul with evil wishes.
No one can prevent certain involuntary transports. Often I have said
to myself, "How light my life would be with _her_!" No one can keep
his faith, his heart, his inner being without hope. Those two motive
powers, of which the Church makes virtues, have sustained me in my
struggle.

But I conceive the regrets that you express to me; they seem to me
natural and true; especially after a protection that has never failed
you since that letter at Vienna. I am, however, joyful to know that I
can write to you with open heart to tell you all those things on which
I have kept silence, and disperse the melancholy complaints you have
founded on misconceptions, so difficult to explain at a distance. I
know you too well, or I think I know you too well, to doubt you for
one moment; and I have often suffered, very cruelly suffered, that you
have doubted me, because, since Neufchâtel, you are my life. Let me
say this to you plainly, after having so often proved it to you. The
miseries of my struggle and of my terrible work would have worn-out
the greatest and strongest men; and often my sister has desired to put
an end to them, God knows how; I always thought the remedy worse than
the disease. It is therefore you alone who have supported me till now;
yet I have never counted on more than we saw--that day at Les Chênes,
you remember?--of that old couple Sismonde de Sismondi, Philemon and
Baucis, which so touched us. Nothing in me has changed.

I have redoubled in work to go and see you this year, and I have
succeeded. Since I last wrote to you I have not slept more than two
hours of a night, and I have written, above my promised books and
articles, two plays in live acts, one with a prologue, which begin
their rehearsal to-morrow at the Odéon. I hoped by working for some
months longer like the last eighteen months to pay my crushing debts
and save Les Jardies. This constant labour has, especially during the
last five years, parted me wholly from society. To-day I want my patent
of eligibility, for Lamartine has a rotten-borough for me, and to be
one of the coming legislature is a future for us.

To conceive of this in the thick of the battle, is it not loving well
to have such courage, such boldness, when, your letters becoming so
rare, I was tortured, week by week, with the desire to go to you and
learn the reason of your silence?--for the few words, almost illegible,
which ended your letters were always to me fresh beams of hope. "Be
patient," you said to me; "you are loved as much as you love. Do not
change, for others change not."

We have both been courageous, one as much as the other; why, therefore,
should we not be happy to-day? Do you think it was for myself that I
have been so persistent in magnifying my name? Oh! I am perhaps very
unjust, but such injustice comes from the violence of my heart. I would
have liked two words for me in your letter, but I sought them in vain;
two words for him who, since the scene you live in is before his eyes,
has not passed, while working, ten minutes without looking at it; I
have there sought all, ever since it came to me, that we each have
asked in the silence of our spirits. I have not been able to part with
it to let Borget make his copy. The certainty of knowing you free has
made me gentle, or I should have been more angry, were you not mourning.

O my beloved angel, be prudent and take care of yourself; take care
of your precious health. I shall not work much before my departure. I
start for Germany March 20th, and I will not cross Saxony without your
permission; but I cannot any longer have so many leagues between us. I
have already signified to my publishers that they must at once print
enough Parts to have no need of me until after September.

I have carefully buried my joy, just as I hid my griefs and my
memories, in the depths of my heart. But I will tell it to you. I
remained, all stupefied, for twenty-four hours, locked in my study,
not willing that any one should speak to me. When I came out I was
hot in the midst of intense sudden cold. Let me tell you of a little
superstition, a little circumstance which has made a great impression
upon me. On November 1 I lost one of the two shirt buttons Madame de
Berny had given me, which I wore one day, and yours the next day. After
losing it, I could only wear yours; and this little chance matter
troubled me to a point you will imagine when I tell you that my mother
and all about me noticed it. I said to myself, "There is in it some
warning from heaven!" I love you so, and it has cost me so horribly to
keep silence about it since Vienna, that I value the solitude of my
study at Passy, where no one penetrates, and where I can be with you.

Ah! dear, you have put so many things into your letter that I do not
start at once. I await your answer here; you will then have had time
to reflect how difficult it is for me to remain in Paris when for six
years I have longed to see you. Oh! write me that your existence shall
be wholly mine, that we shall now be happy, without any possible cloud.
Will you ever know how much strength it has needed to write to you
thus, without saying a word to paint to you the ardour of this unique
love, preserved as my one treasure, my only hope! Oh! how many times,
under my most bitter disappointments, in struggles, in griefs, I have
turned to the North,--to me the Orient, peace, happiness!

To speak now of business, I have made a great step. On the 5th or
7th of February they play at the Odéon "L'École des Grands Hommes,"
an immense comedy on the struggle of a man of genius with his epoch.
The scene is in 1560, in Spain. It relates to the man who sailed a
steamboat in the port of Barcelona, let her sink to the bottom, and
disappeared. If I have a success, I start; if I fail, I must write four
volumes to get the money for my journey. But I have still another play
at the Vaudeville.

My complete works are being rapidly printed, and will be issued during
my journey.

If I have two successes, I shall leave the money to buy back Les
Jardies, and pay off some lesser creditors, and I am sure, in two
years, to complete my liberation. Only I must have enough to buy back
the house for my mother, to whom I owe the sum of forty thousand francs.

Gavault, my lawyer, is satisfied. Every one believes in a great success
for "Les Ressources de Quinola," the false title of my play. I keep the
one I have just told you for the last moment.

The "Mémoires de deux jeunes Mariées," published in the "Presse," has
had the greatest success. But the finest work this year is "Ursule
Mirouët."

I send this little line, written in haste. I will write you more in
detail within three or four days. I am worn-out with work, and I am
still up all night, for there is much to be done to the play. I have
three acts to add to the second play, and my newspaper articles on my
shoulders.

As for your letters, dear, adored one, be without anxiety. If I die
suddenly there is nothing to fear. They are in a box like the one you
have; and above them is a notice, which my sister knows of, to put
them all into the fire without looking at them, and I am sure of my
sister. But why this uneasiness now? Why? I ask myself that question in
terrible anxiety. You must be more ill than you have told me. You did
not fill the last page in your letter! You have put so much uneasiness
around that which makes me happy that I know not what to think. Alas!
do you not feel, my cherished angel, my flower of heaven, that all you
wish of me shall be done as you wish? Do I not love you even more for
you than for myself?

I entreat you, on receiving my letter, write me two words only, to let
me know if I can write to you with open heart (for I am still hampered
by what you say to me), and how you are; I need to know nothing more
than that. You, all is you, dearest; I am only uneasy about your
health. Take care of yourself; you owe this to me.

Adieu, my dear and beautiful life that I love so well, and to whom I
now can tell it. _Sempre medesimo._

       *       *       *       *       *

NOTE.--The "Lettres à l'Étrangère" end here. The letters that follow
are those to Madame Hanska, given in Balzac's Correspondence, vol.
xxiv. of the Édition Définitive of his works. No letters have, so far,
been published between the one dated above, January 5, 1842, and the
one that here follows, dated October 14, 1843, written after a visit
paid by Balzac to Madame Hanska in St. Petersburg.

So far as can now be ascertained, the history of their relationship
from this date is as follows: Madame Hanska would not, or could not,
consent to marry Balzac after Monsieur Hanski's death for the following
reasons: 1. Her duty to her daughter, to whom she was left guardian,
with the care, conjointly with the child's uncle, of enormous estates
in the Ukraine. 2. Russian law, which required relinquishment of
property on marriage with a foreigner. 3. The difficulty of obtaining
the Emperor's consent to such marriage.

The first difficulty was removed by the marriage of her daughter Anna,
in 1846, to Count Georges Mniszech, the owner of vast estates in
Volhynia; and in September of that year Balzac was summoned to meet
Madame Hanska at Wiesbaden, at or about which time it is said that she
pledged herself definitively to marry him.

Meantime, he had met her at several places, and had travelled with
her in Germany, Holland, and Italy, as will be seen by the following
letters. In the summer of 1845 Madame Hanska paid a visit to Paris with
her daughter; but in secrecy to avoid the displeasure of the Russian
government. During this visit Balzac took her to Tours, Vendôme, and
the valley of the Cher, to show her the places of his childhood. The
visit to Vendôme is recorded in a letter written after his death to
M. Armand Baschet by M. Mareschal-Duplessis, director of the College,
who was also director when Balzac was a pupil there. M. Mareschal
mentions that he was accompanied by a lady; but he mistakes Madame
Hanska's nationality and calls her an Englishwoman; or she may herself
have conveyed that idea for the sake of her incognito, which was
all-important to her.

In October of the same year (1845) Balzac accompanied Madame Hanska
to Naples for a few days only; but he met her in Rome in March, 1846,
and stayed there a month. His visit to Wiesbaden, mentioned above,
took place in October, 1846. In December Balzac went to Dresden,
returning some weeks later with Madame Hanska, who remained in Paris
till April, 1847, when she returned to Wierzchownia. Balzac left
Paris in September, 1847, and paid his first and long desired visit
to Wierzchownia, arriving about the first of October. He stayed there
until February, 1848, when he returned to Paris, leaving it again early
in September for Wierzchownia; where he lived until one month after his
marriage to Madame Hanska, which took place March 15, 1850. He returned
to Paris with his wife May 20, and died three months later, August 19,
1850.--TR.
