LETTERS DURING 1846.


PASSY, January 1, 1846. One year more, dear, and I take it with
pleasure; for these years, these thirteen years which will be
consummated in February on the happy day, a thousand times blessed,
when I received that adorable letter starred with happiness and hope,
seem to me links indestructible, eternal. The fourteenth will begin
in two months; and all the days of these years have added to my
admiration, to my attachment, to my fidelity, like that of a dog.

I have a very Grandet mind, I assure you. A few days more, and if
the King of Holland were to offer me sixty thousand francs for my
Florentine furniture, he could not have it! It is still more so in
matters of the heart. I shall have proved it to you fourteen years from
now, when you have seen me forgetting nothing of all my happinesses,
great or small.


January 4.

O dear countess, I received this morning, at half-past eight o'clock,
the letter of your dear child with the portrait of Leonidas; decidedly,
I shall have an "Album Gringalet." I do not understand why on the 22nd
you had not received my letter of the 3rd, sent from Rothschild's
counting-room. When this letter leaves it will be the seventh on its
way to you. I have never failed to tell you day by day what happens to
me; and you will see on your return that I have written the oftenest.
I am going to see your dear Lirette; for I do not wish to forget that
I am a substitute for both of you, mother and daughter, towards her;
moreover, I want to know at what periods she wishes to receive the sum
you have given me for her.

I dined, as I told you I should in my last letter, with Nestor
Roqueplan, on the last day of the year, at the illustrious Delphine's.
We laughed as much as I am capable of laughing without you and far away
from you. Delphine is really a queen of conversation; "that evening
she was particularly sublime, sparkling, ravishing. Gautier was there
also; I came away after a long talk with him; he had been assured there
was no hurry about "Richard Cœur-d'Éponge," the theatre having more
than enough on hand. Gautier and I may make our play together later.
Such was the result of this dinner, the history of which is your due.
Returning home, I met two or three bores, who tired me much. You will
not believe that, for you seem ignorant that I like to have no one but
you, and to see none but you in the world. But, dear countess, the sad
thing is, that I cannot write a line, and I groan--


January 5, midnight.

Here is a strange thing! I received this morning your long letter, one
day later than that of your daughter; this is a mystery, for both came
from Marseille.

Oh! dearest, what a day I have had! atrocious, dreadful, awful! I had
errands to do; I was to go to Froment-Meurice, then to M. Gavault,
then to a ship-builder who is building a ship he is bent on naming for
me, then to the newspaper offices, especially the "Presse." At midday,
after breakfast, I went to the post; good! I received a fine thick
letter, very heavy; my heart quivered with joy. Ah! I was happy! so
happy that in the carriage from Passy to Paris I opened my letter a
thousand times blessed, and read, and read! At last I reached the page
dictated to you by the strange and inconceivable conduct of Madame
A. and Koref; and after having read your crushing reflections I was
thrown into consternation. I closed the letter and put it in my pocket.
At first, any one might have seen my tears; then I was overcome by a
sadness of which the following were the physical effects: Two inches of
snow were on the pavements of Paris; I was in thin boots; so unhappy
was I that I wanted air, I was choking in the _fiacre_. I stopped
it, and got out in the rue de Rivoli and walked, walked, my feet in
the snow, across all Paris, through crowded streets, seeing no one,
among the carriages, noticing none of them; I went, I went, on and
on, my face convulsed, like a madman. People stared at me. I marched
from the rue de Rivoli to the back of the Hôtel de Ville among all
those populous streets, not conscious of the crowd or the cold, or of
anything. What hour was it? what weather? what season? what city? Where
was I? Had any one questioned me I could not have answered him; I was
senseless with pain. Sensibility, which is the blood of the soul, was
flowing out of me in torrents through my wound. And this is what I was
saying to myself: "I have never, in my life, uttered one indiscreet
word; and here are the reasons of my silence: 1. honour and integrity;
2. certainty of injuring the object of my hopes; 3. certainty of
rendering my liquidation impossible; 4. complete uncertainty as to
the result of my wishes. And I am accused of ignoble speeches,--I,
whose conduct is irreproachable!" To meet with this injustice, even
involuntary, from you crushed me; I felt the blows of that club upon
my head at every step. Koref is an infamous spy, an Austrian spy,
well known as such; he is not received anywhere; I do not bow to him
any longer; I scarcely answer him when he speaks to me. Madame A... is
ignorant of this, she confides herself and talks of your interests and
of my affairs to the most dangerous man I know! It is truly incredible!
Moreover, Koref is allied with a very bad woman, a Madame de B... who
spreads slanders, and spies as spies spy, even outside of politics,
and merely to keep her hand in. Who knows if those people have not
already made this the subject of a report? Who knows if Koref, too well
known to be trusted any longer by the Austrian police, has not used
Madame A.'s absurd confidences to get into the service of a hyperborean
power? Ah! truly, Madame A. may have done us, without exaggeration, an
incalculable injury! I, who already have suffered a great pecuniary
loss through absurd cancans sent from Berlin, to have such sufferings,
thanks to that woman, in addition!

Thinking all this I walked on, seeing nothing before me but trouble and
confusion--Koref! whom I have not seen for eighteen months, and to
whom I have not addressed a word for three years, he to call himself
_my friend_! It is too impudent!--I walked with my heart bleeding,
my feet in the ashes of my longed-for future, and thinking ever of
the pitiless reflections that Madame A.'s fatal letter had suggested
to you. At four o'clock I reached Froment-Meurice; nothing was ready,
neither your set, nor the bracelet, nor my seal (_fulge, vivam_) which
I have waited for so long.

I went to Gavault's on foot, from the Hôtel de Ville to the Madeleine.
Gavault was frightened at my face when he saw me without soul, without
strength, without life. From there, still on foot, I went back to
Passy at eight o'clock, without feeling bodily fatigue; the bruised
soul numbed the body, mental fatigue was greater than all physical
exhaustion. At ten o'clock I went to bed; impossible to sleep. I have
lighted my candles and my fire, and taken my coffee.--I have just read
the end of your letter; and the balm of the last sheet has calmed me,
without altogether making the last echoes of my suffering cease.

Till to-morrow: bodily fatigue has come to me and I can sleep. I am
going to bed; it is one o'clock.


January 6.

To-day, January 6, is your birthday, dear countess. I wish to express
to you none but thoughts of gentleness and peace. Going to bed at one
o'clock, I fell asleep among the charming things you said to me at
the close of your letter, and I had no dreams at all. The fatigue of
yesterday, moral and physical, was such that I slept till ten o'clock.
I have just breakfasted and I return to your letter. That which is
grievous in it does not come from you; it comes from strangers, from
that silly Madame A...; and you could not have thought otherwise than
as you did on reading her letter. By a strange fatality I read only
half your letter, and I have suffered by my own fault. I could have
taken a _fiacre_ and read the rest; but, I see now, deep and violent
sensations do not reason; they rush like torrents or thunderbolts.
What upset me thus was that I saw plainly they were trying to give
you malignant impressions about me. I have no need of "society;" far
from it, I have a most profound horror of it; celebrity weighs upon
me; I thirst for a _home_, a _home of my own_, I thirst to drink long
draughts of a life in common, the life of two. I have no affection in
the world that conflicts in any manner whatsoever with what I have in
my soul, which is indeed the very substance of that soul; "the rest
is all vain dream." To finish, once for all, with bad people and bad
tales, tell yourself, dear, that society is composed of criminals
who have a horror of honest men and of men without sin; it hates the
happiness that eludes it.

Let me, before I close my letter, say this: my mind is made up; if
I am forced to abandon my hopes, if, by force of hostile and secret
persecution you should turn your back upon me, my resolutions are
fixed; the haschisch that I tried yesterday will render a man imbecile
at the end of a year; he can remain so, knowing nothing further of the
pains or joys of life, until he dies. Haschisch, as you know, is only
an extract of hemp, and hemp contains the end of man. No, if I cannot
have my beautiful dreamed-of life, I want nothing. Yesterday, all the
treasures of furniture which I have collected were so many bits of wood
and crockery to me! Poverty, were I alone, has attractions for me. I
want nothing, except in relation to the secret object of my life; that
object is the supreme motive of all my prayers, my steps, my efforts,
my ideas, my toils, of the fame I seek to acquire, in short of my
future and of all that I am. For thirteen years this aspiration has
been the principle of my blood--for ideas and sentiments work through
the blood.

I thank you for the instructions you give me about Lirette. I will pay
her the sum agreed upon to-morrow at her convent, and I will inquire
the amount that you must still add. I am so glad to do any business
for you that you ought to make me give you a commission for it. Poor
dear Atala [a name by which he called her in jest], poor dear Anna, the
picture of your losses and financial deceptions distresses me; alas!
there is nothing to be done but to return to your own home as soon as
the thermal treatment at Baden is duly accomplished. Yes, you will have
to return courageously, to settle all and complete your work in order
to obtain the right to rest in peace.

I leave you to go to the post, for I expect a letter with news of my
Amsterdam cases, which are as long delayed in coming from Rouen to
Paris as they were between Amsterdam and Rouen. If I do not finish my
letter to-day I will to-morrow; and to-morrow it will jump into the
letter-box, and the day after be at Roanne. What a hippogriff is the
post!

Adieu, dear; I am going to work like one possessed. I start April 1 by
boat for Civita-Vecchia. Easter Sunday falls on the 12th; I shall see
Rome for ten days; then I will return with you through Switzerland.
There's my plan. Between now and then I shall have my liberty. Take
care of yourselves, all, but you especially. I will answer next week
your dear child's letter, and also Georges'.

When I think that after Baden you will have to return home, a shudder
comes over me. You know when you enter there but you don't know when
you can leave. But I will not end my letter sadly; find here within it
the fresh flowers of an old affection. My heart blesses you, my soul is
round you with all its thoughts. As for my mind, you know that is only
the reflection and echo of yours.



PASSY, February 8, 1845.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Naples.]

No letters! my uneasiness has reached its height; I do not know what
to think; I believe you are ill. I am tortured to the point of not
being able to write a line to-day. I dine with M. F..., a sacrifice
to make, and a great one, I assure you; but it is very essential not
to displease him; he does my business well, and I am more and more
satisfied with him. This week we attack an account very difficult to
terminate; that of B... It is a matter of nine thousand francs to be
paid. No letter! I am very unhappy.


February 9.

What joy! I have your letter at last. I ought to write to you on my
knees for such kindness, and such persistency and perseverance in that
kindness. The passage in which you tell me you had been lost in a
contemplation of the future like one of mine, and in which you seem so
touched by those transports of worship I often have toward you,--that
true affection, so humble coming from a soul so lofty, gave me for a
moment more happiness than I have ever had before in my life.

Dear countess, do not risk yourself in Rome before Georges is perfectly
recovered; put off the journey for your children's sake; Rome will not
be swallowed up to-morrow, but health is lost there in a week. Wait;
wait.

When you receive this letter LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE will be finished.

I have paid M. Potier a thousand francs, for he has had, you see, to
incur expenses,--he says so himself. This is a house of forty-five
thousand francs, and fifteen thousand for additions, sixty thousand
in all. [The house in the rue Fortunée.] I hope to own the house and
to have paid up all disquieting claims by the end of February. But
all these uncertainties prevent me from working at my ease. I am like
a bird on a branch. I hope you will let me come and tell you of my
installation and spend a few days with you in April.

In going to Souverain's to-day I saw in the shop of a dealer in
bric-à-brac a miniature of Madame de Sévigné, done in her day it seemed
to me, which can be had for very little. Do you want it? It seemed
to me rather good; but it must be said that I scarcely looked at it
because I was in a hurry.


February 10.

I have seen that miniature again, and it is hideous. On the other
hand, I have bought a portrait of Queen Marie Leczinska after Coypel,
evidently painted in his atelier. I bought it for the value of the
frame; as it is one of those portraits that queens give to cities or
great personages, though it is but a copy, I thought it would decorate
a salon.

I am more inert than I can tell you; I work badly, without inspiration,
without taste, without courage; my life, my soul, and all my forces are
elsewhere. I have asked Gautier to bring me an artist named Chenavard,
a friend of La Belgiojoso, whom I know but whose address is unknown
to me, to enlighten me as to the value of Marie Leczinska's portrait,
because, like Louis XIV., "I don't choose to deceive myself."


February 11.

Much tramping, much fatigue, without result. M. F... has fallen
dangerously ill, and that delays my business. You see, dear beloved
countess, that I am not the master of this liquidation; the least
effort would be punished; I must wait like a hunter on the watch. It
is dreadful! I assure you that the harassment of my affairs, joined
to that of my soul (which is tortured by absence as one is, they say,
by remorse) affects my poor brain powerfully. Without vanity, I can
certify to you that I am wonderful; I rise every night, I think of
you, I write to you, and stay so for two hours before I am able to
begin to work. Then I continue to write, but for you, and not, as
I ought, for the public. Or if by a miracle it is not you of whom
I am thinking, it is about one of the houses offered to me, its
furnishing, its arrangement, and the thousand details of my business;
for every affair of a thousand francs exacts as much care as a matter
of a hundred thousand. Then I re-read your dear letters, I look at
my proofs, and I reason with myself. The day dawns, and I have done
nothing. I tell myself that I am a monster, that to be truly worthy of
you I must forget you and girt my loins with the labourer's cord; I say
insults to myself; I grasp that ivory Daffinger; I think you there; I
dream--and I waken to remorse for having dreamed instead of working.

Madame de Girardin writes to ask me to go and see her. There is to be
a lady present, daughter or grand-daughter of Sheridan, who desires to
see me. I shall go in my grand costume of fine manners.


February 12.

I went to bed this morning, my hours upset! and all for a tiresome
Englishwoman who stared at me through an eyeglass as she might at an
actor. Madame de Girardin, charming in a small company, is, it must be
admitted, a less agreeable mistress of a house at great receptions.
She belies her origin by her talent; but when her talent is not to the
fore she becomes once more the daughter of her mother; that is to say,
bourgeoise and Gay _pur sang_. The Duc de Guiche, who has given in
his allegiance, was there; he exerted himself, and was almost witty,
which I had doubted. The memory of Madame Kalergi, whom I never knew,
or even saw, as you know, pursued me. Admiral de la Susse described
the regrets of the Baden society that I did not accept the invitations
of that beautiful lady, but confined myself to a certain family who
had confiscated me to their own profit. From that moment I became of a
most stupendous stupidity; so that Madame de Girardin whispered to me,
"What is the matter with you this evening?" To which I answered, "Your
Englishwoman has gone to my heart." At which she laughed and I kept
the secret of my melancholy--I saw once more the scenery of Baden, the
Hôtel du Cerf, the promenades, etc. Ah! how you absorb me! It cannot be
expressed; a word a nothing, brings me back to you.

Dear countess, we must console that poor Georges. I will find a copy of
the Dejean catalogue; it is very rare, the whole edition having been
burned in the fire of the rue Pot-de-Fer (when the "Contes Drolatiques"
were destroyed). I have found a work the title of which you will find
on the sheet which envelops this letter. Write me whether Georges knows
of it. It is the finest iconography of coleopteras in existence. Only
seven copies remain; the blocks are planed and that ends it. If he
wants the work I will bring it to him with his insects and the Dejean.
In wandering about, Saturday, I found two vases (Restoration) on which
were painted, for some entomologist no doubt, the prettiest insects in
the world. They are the work of an artist and must have cost a great
deal. Georges will like them, I know, and I shall return him painted
pots for painted pots. Perhaps these vases were a gift to Latreille;
for no one, I think, would have done such conscientious work unless
for some great entomological celebrity. It is a real _trouvaille_, a
chance such as I never had before. No one knows what Paris is; with
time and patience, everything can be found here, even at a bargain.
Just now I am negotiating for the purchase of a chandelier which must
have come from the palace of some Emperor of Germany, because it is
surmounted by the double-headed eagle. It is a Flemish chandelier
and came from Brussels no doubt before the Revolution; it weighs two
hundred pounds and is of brass; I have bought it for the intrinsic
value of the metal--four hundred and fifty francs. I intend it for my
dining-room, which will be in the same style. I see you alarmed by
this communication; but do not be anxious; no debts are incurred; I
am obeying your sovereign orders. Lirette will be paid as you intend,
and Froment-Meurice also. As to my personal affairs, the liquidation
has more money than it needs. Froment-Meurice is really an impossible
jeweller. Here it is February 17th, and the figure of Nature is not yet
finished. He says it is still in the hands of the chaser. He himself
is wholly absorbed in a toilet-set for the Duchess of Lucca.


February 18.

I have received the letter in which you tell me that Georges gets
better and better, and that he had come to see you at the Villa Reale.
This good letter shows me that calmness is restored to your heart and
mind, because you have returned to your habit of writing every evening
when your good friendship battles with sleep, often vanquished to my
profit. A strange thing! there are in this long letter that I am about
to carry to the post things that reply to the questions in yours! This
affinity with each other brings tears to my eyes. How I love your
letters! how true they are! In reading them I seem to hear you speak;
they are indeed a balm to all my wounds. I beg of you do not go to
Rome, I repeat it; the journey might be fatal to Georges; he is very
delicate. I was like that at his age; but I never thought of myself,
and others cared still less for me.

I am not working as much as I ought. You do right to tell me so;
believe that I blame myself harshly. "The days are going," as you
say; but you do not know the labyrinth through which my liquidation
is leading me; you are ignorant of the incessant tramps which upset
all my days, and often for sums not more than a hundred francs. My
tranquillity means owning property, settlement in a home, and respect.
Therefore I avow that even if I incur your blame (to me so terrible) I
must put my liquidation before my literary work.

I am glad that the engraving and device of your armed knight pleased
you. No one helped your servitor; pray believe that; the Latin is my
own property: _Virens sequar_ and _Fulge, vivam_, are worthy of the E
inscribed on the star.

I have the portrait of Queen Marie Leczinska. It is not by Coypel, but
was done in his atelier by a pupil, either Lancret or another, as
you please. One must be a connoisseur not to think it a Coypel. The
portrait has been engraved, and I shall lose nothing on it, Chenavard
says.

I met Koref, who had the impudence to tell me he had been talking of me
to one of your friends in the most eulogistic terms. I wish you could
have seen me look at him as I said, "I do not doubt it." He left me
instantly.



PASSY, March, 1846.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Naples.]

Dear countess, the person who will take to you this letter is a friend
of mine, M. Schnetz, the painter of the beautiful picture of the
"Madonna's Vow," which is in Saint-Roch. He is the Director of the
French School of Art in Rome, and I profit by his kindness to send you
news from me to meet you on your arrival in Rome.

As M. Nacquart prophesied, my courage has been rewarded; to-day I can
walk [he had been thrown from a carriage], and all my preparations for
my journey are made. My place is booked in the mail-cart for Lyon; for
the Marseille's post service carries so many letters that letters in my
person are turned out of the mail-cart by the other kind.

I must wear my bandages for another month; but nothing prevents me
from seeing Rome with you, or rather you with Rome. Oh! it was God who
led you to Naples, you and yours, more than you think perhaps. Now,
the wisest thing you can do is to stay in Rome, and not continue your
projected journey until you have received good news from the Ukraine;
for they say that those provinces are in a state of disquieting
fermentation; I even hear talk of a general insurrection. Eleven
hundred seigneurs and land-owners in Galicia have been murdered by
their peasantry, whom they were endeavouring to draw into rebellion
against their sovereign, the Emperor of Austria. The Austrians are
to-day in retreat (you will see that in the "Débats"). The revolt,
or the insurrection, has been simultaneous throughout the former
Poland--Prussian, Austrian, and Russian; the movement is communistic.
I tremble for your cousin L.... The insurgents, they tell me, are
occupying Piotrkov. This is really frightful; no quarter is given on
either side; priests, women, children, old men, all are in arms. Bands
of ten thousand starving Poles have thrown themselves from Russian
Poland into Prussia (where the famine began), and the Prussians are
thrusting them back, as if infected with the plague, by a cordon of
troops. Every one here foresees nothing but evil for that unfortunate
nation; but the surprise is that Galicia, which seemed to be so well
governed, so happy even, under the Austrian sceptre, should have
revolted in this untimely manner. Chlopiçki, whom they wished to put
at the head of the movement, refused. He has retired into Prussia,
saying that he would blow his brains out sooner than command such a
folly. All sensible people groan over it. They say that Lithuania
and the provinces in the west of Russia will rise also, on account
of the recruiting for the Caucasus. What disasters for the future of
Europe must we not fear, with these populations at a pitch of chronic
insanity! And the governments, which admit that they are already
exhausted, will they be able to repress and control them?

How fortunate that you are in Rome! for even you, so wise and so
intelligent, have jealous and malevolent people about you over there.
Besides, no one knows what might happen if you were caught between the
insurgents and the troops. The "Gazette de Cologne" has published,
under Prussian censure, an article which speaks of the blindness of
the governments in the matter of Poland, and dwells on the fact that
nationalities cannot perish. (Don't speak of this to any one.) I hope
nothing unfortunate will happen to Countess Mniszech; but Georges must
be very uneasy about his mother, for the whole of Galicia is expected
to rise. They say that Hungary, hitherto so faithful, is also in arms.

You can form no idea of my happiness ever since my place was booked in
the Lyon mail. I am now making all my arrangements.

I have given Lirette the money you gave me for her. I went to the
convent myself, though still ill. Here's a strange thing! She has been
requested by Abbé L... to send to Petersburg an affidavit declaring
that neither he, the abbé, nor you had endeavoured to dissuade her
from entering a convent, and affirming that she did not possess forty
roubles and consequently had never given that sum to the convent. What
does all that mean? I hope they will permit her to write, and that I
shall bring you a long letter from her.

Take care of yourself, and do not forget to let me know where you
are in Rome, addressing your letter to "M. Lysimaque, at the French
Consulate, Civita-Vecchia, for M. de Balzac;" and try to find me a
niche not far from you, if it is only a kennel. I hope my preceding
letter has reached you through the Rothschilds.

What do you think of M. de Custine, who offered me a letter of
introduction to Prince George (Michel Angelo)? He did not remember the
prince's relationship to you! I take such part in your interests and
those of your dear child that I tremble every morning as I open the
newspapers. _Mon Dieu!_ what anxiety when I think of the state in which
your affairs are! You must not think of returning there till all is
quiet once more.

Without adieu this time, but _à bientôt_.[1]

[Footnote 1: Balzac started for Rome March 20, and returned to Paris
May 1, 1846.]



To MADAME LAURE SURVILLE, _Paris_.

ROME, the Eternal City, April, 1846.

My dear Laure, I feel in advance the pleasure you will enjoy in
thinking that your brother has put his hand to the pen in the city
of the Cæsars, popes, and others. Give you a description of it?--I
could not do it. Read Lamennais ("Affaires de Rome") and you will know
nearly as much as he or I. I have been received with distinction by our
Holy Father; and you must tell my mother that in prostrating myself
at the feet of the father of all faithful people, whose hierarchical
slipper was kissed by me in company with a _podestat d'Avignone_ (a
hideous mayor from the Vaucluse district, who claimed to be his former
subject), I thought of her, and I am bringing her back a little chaplet
prepared by Leo XII. much shorter to recite than the old one. It is
called La Corona, and is blessed by his present Holiness.

I have seen all Rome from A to Z. The illumination of the dome of St.
Peter's on Easter-Eve is alone worth the journey; but as the same might
be said of the benediction given _urbi et orbi_, Saint Peter's itself,
the Vatican, the ruins, etc., etc., my journey really counts as ten
journeys.

I am so content in Rome that I am thinking of passing nearly the whole
of next winter here, for I want to know everything about it. As there
are three hundred churches, you can imagine that I have only been to
see the principal ones. Saint Peter's surpasses all that one expects,
but through reflection. I climbed to the ball above which is the cross.
It would take a week to tell of Saint Peter's. Imagine that your house
could easily be put into the cornice of one of the flat double-columns
of the interior third tier of the dome. Nothing could surpass the
_Miserere_ of the choir, which is so superior to the choir of the
Sistina that I preferred to listen twice to that of Saint Peter's: the
first time, it was the music of angels (Guglielmi); the second time
it was learned music (Fioravanti), which I thought bad, though the
execution was perfect.

Truly, everybody should lay by money and go once in his life to Rome,
or he will know nothing of antiquity, architecture, splendour, and the
impossible realized. Rome, in spite of the short time I have stayed
here, will always be one of the grandest and most beautiful memories of
my life.... I sail on the 22nd for Genoa, and shall go from there as
quickly as possible to Paris.



PASSY, June 14, 1846.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Rome.]

Dear countess, I find in the "Presse" of yesterday an article sent
from Russia, which seems to me so disquieting that I send it to you.
To-morrow I will send you the "Presse" and the "Débats." You will
receive them for one month.

I rise at half-past three, not earlier, though I ought to be up at two.
Sleep will not come as it should at seven in the evening, on account of
the heat. It is now half-past four, and I have not yet written a line!

Adieu for to-day, till to-morrow. M. F... is coming to see me to-day,
and I shall have to talk business after working all night.

The Russian article in the "Presse" points to very serious matters.
I believe in the spoliation of the land-owners by the government; my
uneasiness about your interests is extreme. Will your children have
time? What does the article mean? Tell me fully what you think about
it. It seems to me to be written by some one who feigns ignorance on
the subject.


June 15.

Yesterday I wrote eight pages; the heat was so intense that I put
myself into a cold water bath. M. F... came to see me, and I did not
go to bed till half-past seven. But I had to be waked out of my first
sleep, for at half-past nine the carriers brought the "Adam and Eve"
and the "Saint Peter," and my presence was necessary. The concierge
had paid sixty francs too much, and I had to explain the error. The
discussions as to this lasted till half-past eleven, and I did not
get to sleep again till midnight. I had nothing to pay with but a
thousand-franc note, for which it was difficult at that hour to get
change; and besides, I opened the packages to amuse M. F. and an artist
who was with us. The Natoire is charming, signed and authentic. But
Holbein's Saint Peter was held to be sublime. The artist, who is a fine
connoisseur, said that at public sale it ought to bring three thousand
francs.

Now I have paid out one thousand and forty francs. I have only the
cases from Rome and the one from Geneva to receive, which will not be
more together than five hundred francs, and a third from Genoa, five
hundred more. So that leaves me still fifteen hundred francs, and the
Chemin du Nord pays a dividend in July; therefore, you see, I am not at
all embarrassed.

My situation is even better than I thought. With ten thousand francs
all will be brought to an end by M. F..., and my principal creditors
perfectly agree to the broad manner in which I am settling my accounts
with them.

I can easily suffice to pay all. My health is excellent, and my
talent--oh! I have recovered it in all its bloom. My various treaties
are to be concluded this week.

Write me the time when you will permit me to come and see you again, so
that I may get myself in readiness.

Among the serious paintings that I have in my study, it must be owned
that the Natoire [Adam and Eve] looks a little too mincing. I hope to
sell that false Breughel for five hundred francs, and that will pay for
Genoa, while returning me the cost of the picture.

Here is what I am now going to write: "L'Histoire des Parents pauvres,"
consisting of "Le Bonhomme Pons"[1] (which will make two or three
folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE) and "La Cousine Bette" which will make
sixteen; also "Les Méfaits d'un Procureur-du-roi," making six more;
in all, twenty-five folios, or twenty thousand francs, newspapers
and publishers combined; then, to conclude all, "Les Paysans." All
that surpasses my payments. I have besides, for this winter, "Les
Petits Bourgeois," and the regulating of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE; also the
reprinting of the "Contes Drolatiques" and my comedy. I shall thus have
acquired, I think, the right to travel a little. I shall have no debts,
and a little house of my own.

But much work is still necessary; if I do eight pages to-day that will
be a good deal, for the weather seems threatening to be hotter than
ever. I am now going to do a number of errands in Paris, and send you
the "Presse" and the "Débats." The Chemin du Nord will not be in full
activity for three weeks yet, and that is the cause of the fall in
stock which unnecessarily disturbs you. I have so much hope in it that,
had I the money, I would again buy into it. The great banking-houses
are not anxious, for they are buying it. If the railway has a hundred
thousand travellers in July, there will be a rise of two hundred
francs; for the funds are placed at ten per cent. I should like to keep
five or six hundred francs in the bank so as to buy thirty-five more
shares--in case they fall lower, be it understood.

No news from Rome. But I am not uneasy; I am in a phase of hope and
confidence which surprises myself; for nothing is really changed in
my position; yet I feel, I don't know how or why, less sad, less
discouraged than usual. It is as if currents, waves, floods of
affection came at moments through my heart for you; it seems to me to
be a sympathetic effect between us, and as if at that moment you were
thinking of me. You are indeed the principle of the new courage and
talent that I feel within me; if I strive to be free and esteemed, it
is for you. The world is nothing to me; I do not care for it. I seek
to pay all, to make my place clean, to have a home that is dignified
and suitable. I devote myself to that result, so often preached to me
by you, and the sense of the good I do for the future represses for
the moment the pain of an absence which your ideas consider necessary.
Moreover, the subjects I am now to write of please me, and can be
done with extreme rapidity. The publishing business is at this moment
in a bad state. This morning I am going to see Véron, Furne, and
Charpentier; but to-day is Monday, and to-morrow is the inauguration
of the Chemin de fer du Nord; so it is possible I may postpone these
visits till the day after.

[Footnote 1: In "Le Bonhomme Pons," afterwards called "Le Cousin Pons,"
will be found a description of Balzac's own passion for collecting
antiquities and bric-à-brac. This passion was partly his natural
instinct, and partly his desire to fill with treasures the home for
which he longed. His collection is described in "Le Cousin Pons." See
Memoir p. 323.--TR.]


June 16.

It is now a week since I returned from Tours and I have only a dozen
pages done, when I ought to have many more. But, as you know, one does
not easily resume either hours of work or the faculty of working. Every
day I go out for two hours to attend to business. I have not yet seen
Émile de Girardin, or Véron, or M. Deshayes.

M. Buquet has sent me a great many insects; show the list of them to
Georges, and send it back to me when he has chosen those he wants. Tell
him to mark in pencil against them. Tell him also how keenly and deeply
I have felt for his misfortune [the death of his father]. And this is
very sincere; for there are but you three in whom I take an interest
in this world. The others are not worth naming; and it is that I may no
longer be shackled, but wholly a thing all yours, that I throw myself
up to my chin into work. I am now finishing "Les Paysans" and "Les
Petits Bourgeois," and beginning to invent "Le Vieux Musicien" ["Cousin
Pons"] and "La Cousine Bette."

Those four works will pay my last debts, and this winter "L'Éducation
du Prince" and "La Dernière Incarnation de Vautrin" will give me the
first money which will be really mine, and the beginning of my fortune.
The times require that I should do two or three masterly works to
overthrow the false gods of our bastard literature, and prove that I am
younger, fresher, more fruitful than ever.

The "Vieux Musicien" is a poor relation, crushed by insults and
humiliations, full of heart, forgiving all, and avenging himself by
benefactions. "La Cousine Bette" is another poor relation, overwhelmed
by insults and humiliations, living in the homes of three or four
families, and meditating vengeance for her bruised self-love and
her wounded vanity. These two histories with that of "Pierrette"
constitute the "Histoire des Parents pauvres." I shall try to put
"Le Vieux Musicien" into the "Semaine," "La Cousine Bette" into the
"Constitutionnel," at the same time that "Les Paysans" appears, and
that the "Débats" prints "Les Petits Bourgeois."

I will send my letters Thursdays and Sundays; next Sunday you will
receive a packet. On that day I shall have begun "La Cousine Bette,"
and "Les Paysans" will be in full blast. Bertin does not want "Les
Petits Bourgeois" till next September. No, to be far from you now is to
be crucified daily. If you only knew under what heat I am working you
would pity me. May your letters give me courage and hope. _Au revoir_
and _à bientôt_, I trust.



PASSY, July 13, 1846.

Dear countess, a disagreeable thing has happened to me which will
take much time; a creditor to satisfy for a very small sum; but the
course he is taking is dangerous for me, and will annoy me much and
necessitate a multitude of steps. You see, the end of liquidations is
always difficult; it is not enough to have the money, the settlement
must be negotiated. That is what crushes me and hinders my work. This
new creditor will take a whole week of my time. I can't help it. M.
F... is in Brussels, pursuing a bankrupt. Besides, the creditor in
question refuses an intermediary, and insists on treating with me. When
this is over I will tell you what he has done to me. It is written
above that I shall know all the horrors of debt.


July 14.

I have nothing new to tell you, except that I am much fatigued. I have
passed the night in hunting for receipted bills and memoranda. It is an
excessive bore. Buisson has returned; we are not agreed as to figures.
If I do not settle this affair now it will become onerous in the future
and more difficult to terminate. I am fully aware that I must attend
to my liquidation before all else. I am really frightened to see very
honest men asking in good faith for money that has already been paid
to them and become stupefied when they have their own receipts before
their eyes. M. Picard, my lawyer, says it happens every day.

You have no idea what a hunted hare's life I have led from 1836 to
1846. The state of my papers expresses it in a lamentable fashion; it
is enough to break one's heart! It will take six months at least to put
them in order. In the hurry of my various movings the business papers
have been piled up without care, stuffed into boxes, twisted, pressed,
crushed, torn. I need a vast library with numerous drawers in which
to classify and put them away. Space is wanting here; I smother. The
furniture, which is fine, is getting spoiled; a house is a necessity as
urgent as the payment of my debts. I am really as much hurried as I was
in 1837, and it is an inexplicable miracle, to me how I ever did those
sixteen volumes of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE between 1841 and 1846.

Two years of calmness and tranquillity in a home like the Beaujon
house are absolutely necessary to heal my soul after sixteen years of
successive catastrophes. I feel, I do assure you, very weary of this
incessant struggle, as keen to-day in paying my last debts as when it
concerned the total of them. And always my crushing literary labour in
the midst of these worrying affairs! Were it not for the new causes of
courage which have come into my heart, I should, like that shipwrecked
man whose strength surmounted for one whole day the fury of the seas,
succumb to waves less rough and gentler within sight of port. To be
torn perpetually from calmness and works of the mind by vexations and
worries that drive ordinary men mad--is that living, I ask you?

No, I have not lived in these last years, except at Dresden, Carnstadt,
Baden, Rome, or in travelling. Thanks be to you, O dear and tender
consoling angel, who alone have poured into my desolate life some
drops of pure happiness, that marvellous oil which does at times give
courage and vigour to the fainting wrestler. That alone should open to
you the gates of paradise, if indeed, you have any sins with which to
reproach yourself--you, wife so perfect, mother so devoted, friend so
kind and compassionate. It is a great and very noble mission to console
those who have found no consolation upon earth. I have, in the treasure
of your letters, in the still greater treasure of my recollections,
in the grateful and constant thought of the good you have done to my
soul by your counsel and your example, a sovereign remedy against
all misfortunes; and I bless you very often, my dear and beneficent
star, in the silence of night and in the worst of my troubles. May
that blessing, which looks to God as the Author of all good, reach you
often. Try to hear it sometimes in the murmuring sounds that whisper
in the soul though we know not whence they come. My God! without you,
where should I be!

With what ever increasing gratitude do I look at the casket in which
are your letters, those treasures of intelligence, and kindness,
thinking how you have ever been to me a beneficent friend, gentle and
kind, without failure or deception of any sort, without reproaches or
regrets--like a spring ever flowing, so that, even now, in the midst
of your personal anxieties, you are still concerned for me, for my
literary and financial interests, for my future, in short!--

Ah! how well I comprehend the tears shed by Teano when the memory of
Caliste came back too powerfully to his sickened heart! It is a noble
thing, admit it, the sacred chrism of tears shed on a head, on a brow
irreproachable by a poor man who adores them and says, "Would that I
could love you more!"


July 15.

Yesterday the affair of that creditor took my whole day. I also went
to fetch my proofs at the "Constitutionnel." Alas! here it is July 15,
and it is doubtful if by the 31st I can have finished "Les Parents
pauvres." "Les Paysans" will take August and September; especially with
the journey I am to make [that to Wiesbaden]. There's the naked truth;
but if "Les Paysans" bring twenty-five thousand francs, that will be
thirty-five thousand in four or five months; that's a great deal. When
I am paid for LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE, you see, my liquidation will be well
advanced; so I shall put off all solution till the month of November.
The Beaujon house will not be free till then; then I shall know what
to expect from the Chemin du Nord and from myself. I have my apartment
here till August 1; so I must be patient, work, and liquidate. To-day
I have to go again to the Palais de Justice about the affair of that
creditor; it is a day lost. I will write you another line to-night
before dinner. I have all my proofs to put in order.


July 16.

Yesterday I came in late and too tired to write you the promised line;
moreover, I found the picture restorer waiting for me. He is the
cleverest of his trade in Paris; a former pupil of David and of Gros;
he is a great connoisseur. He thinks "Le Jugement de Paris" superb, and
attributes it to Giorgione. He accepts the "Chevalier de Malte" for a
Sebastian del Piombo; he thinks it a very fine thing, and deplores the
accident to the Bronzino, which he considers a work of the first order;
the hand especially enchanted him. He will restore them all, and also
the flower-picture, which has been badly cleaned. He is a very good
little man, much of a connoisseur, and has promised me his help on
all occasions. He is to come back Saturday and make the toilet of the
"Chevalier de Malte," supposed to have a layer of church grease upon
him,--the smoke of candles and other disagreeable ecclesiastical glaze.

You see, dear countess, what Paris is. I sent for the little man in
question two weeks ago and it has taken him that time to get here.
And my frames! ordered a month ago and not yet begun. That is Paris!
it needs time and will to get the simplest and most trifling things;
imagine therefore what is needed for serious matters. "La Femme" by
Mireveldt, which you gave me, my restorer considered an admirable
thing, a real marvel. He consoled me for my false Breughel, and did
not despise it as Chenavard did. But no matter, I don't wish to keep
it, nor the landscape by Krug-Miville, nor "Les Sorciers." I want good
things or none.

Now just imagine that a pretended creditor,--I have his receipts,--a
mechanician, took an idea to complain of me at the office of the
_procureur-du-roi_, and I was troubled by a letter requesting me to go
there to answer a complaint; I! that is telling you all. I could not
understand what it meant; I was too sure of myself to be uneasy; but I
feared the malignancy of the newspapers, for I know of what they are
capable when it concerns me. You remember that story of Brussels in
1843. However, yesterday at half-past three, the substitute-procureur
gave my pretended creditor a good lecture, and showed him his own
receipt. He is a bad man, the accomplice of servants I had at Les
Jardies; and they no doubt plotted this fine thing among them. I owe
him nothing but some unimportant costs, for which he may try to sue me.
You see, of course, I can easily pay him those fifty francs (at the
most), but I want to give him a lesson and not pay him on account of
his complaint, for others might try the same means. I have a project of
making him pay five hundred francs to get his fifty. It is vengeance;
but I think it is permissible in such a case.

I am going valiantly to work, and with what ardour! I have now spent
two whole nights on "Les Parents pauvres." I think it will be really a
fine work, extraordinary among those with which I am most satisfied.
You shall see. You know it is dedicated to our dear Teano, and I want
it to be worthy of him.

It is seven in the morning; I have been at my proofs for three hours.
It is very arduous, for this history is something between "César
Birotteau" and the "Interdiction." The question is how to give interest
to a poor and simple-minded man, an old man. I have just been reading
the papers. "L'Époque" has passed over, skipped, forgotten to print
the twenty finest lines in Esther's letter to Lucien. I am in despair
because of you. I must get them replaced if possible.

You ought to be pleased with Méry's novel; it is enchanting! What wit
the fellow has! Too much, perhaps; it is like a shopful of crystals.
He breakfasts with me to-day, and we shall regale ourselves by talking
of you. I want also to communicate to him the idea of my farce on the
army, and propose to him to write it between us for Frédérick.

Must I bid you adieu, dear valiant soul, sister of my soul. I would I
could send you back the good you do me from those heights where you
shine, but that is impossible: I am a man, and you are an angel; I can
only equal myself to you by the reflection of your intelligence, so
powerful, yet at the same time so simple and so candid; to you, in whom
all gracious details attract yet without detriment to the _ensemble_
which charms and binds for life. If I did not fear to displease you I
could go on thus forever; but if I wish to satisfy you I must work,
work on, work ever. Besides, is not that being occupied with you? So I
leave you for my "Parents pauvres," and I hope you will reward me by
one of those exquisite letters of which you alone possess the secret.



PASSY, July 17, 1846.

Yesterday, dear countess, I had Bertin[1] to breakfast, which was
delicate, fine, superfine, I'll answer for it. He was charming, and he
stayed a long time, talking and looking at my pictures and bric-à-brac.
My whole day was taken up, or very nearly; and I profited by what
remained of it to go and see Véron, whom I did not find, and Gavault on
business. I dine to-day with Madame de Girardin; I want to confer with
her husband about "Les Paysans." You will receive three newspapers:
the "Presse," "Débats," and "Époque." I wish also to make you read an
Opposition journal.

Bertin was stupefied at my riches. He thought that tête-à-tête of
old Sèvres delicious; and declared I could sell my beautiful Chinese
porcelain service for three or four thousand francs. He told me he had
given commissions to one of the cleverest and most influential men of
our embassy to China; he wanted fine vases of old porcelain, but was
told there was nothing now to be bought in China but the modern. Old
china is all bought up by the mandarins, the court, and the rich; and
the prices are ten times higher than ours in Paris. All their admirable
productions of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries are now in
Europe. There is nothing left in Nankin or in Canton, and nothing in
the interior of the Empire, except what belongs to the emperor and
private persons.

I am notified that the pictures from Rome will be here in five or six
days, and the picture from Heidelberg in three or four. They were very
reasonable in Rome. I had only to pay twenty-five Roman crowns in
duties (about one hundred and fifty francs), but the total expense is
more than three hundred. So if the other Italian pictures arrive, what
will become of me? I must make preparations, for I have received no
letter from the consul-general, which seems to me ominous.

I asked Bertin to send you the beginning of Charles de Bernard's novel.
Tell me if you have received all, and whether you are satisfied. I
re-read yesterday, according to your sovereign orders, "L'Instruction
criminelle." You are right, as usual; it is a fine thing.

Your semi-compatriot Walewski is to marry, they say, Mademoiselle
Ricci, grand-daughter of Stanislas Poniatowski, and descendant of
Macchiavelli through the women. She has, I am told, a hundred thousand
francs as _dot_, and three hundred thousand in expectation. Walewski
was madly in love with her, and, in his quality of dandy he found no
other way of proving it to her than to marry her. What will become of
the son of the great man, _le grand Colonna Walewski_ with such a poor
little civil list?

I leave you to return to my old musician. I am very well; my head is
full of ideas; I work easily, for I have the hope of going to see you
at Kreuznach as soon as I have finished my three volumes: there's the
secret of my courage.

[Footnote 1: Armand Bertin; his father, Louis-François, founded the
"Journal des Débats;" after the latter's death in 1841, Armand Bertin
edited the paper.--TR.]


July 18.

No letters, dear countess! that is not nice of you. Here I am very
uneasy, very much worried, not to say quite discouraged. It is midday;
I got back at one in the morning from Madame de Girardin's. The dinner
was given for a Madame de Hahn, a famous German actress, whom a
gentleman endowed with fifty thousand francs a year withdrew from the
stage and married, in spite of all the petty magnates of his family and
caste. Madame de Girardin had her two great men, Hugo and Lamartine,
the two Germans, husband and wife, Dr. Cabarrus and his daughter (the
doctor is the son of Ouvrard and Madame de Tallien, and a friend from
childhood of Émile de Girardin), and your servant. The dinner was over
by ten o'clock. At the end of a political disquisition by Hugo I let
myself go to an improvisation in which I fought him and beat him, with
some success I do assure you. Lamartine seemed charmed and thanked me
effusively. He wants me more than ever to go to the Chamber; but do not
be anxious, I will never cross the threshold of mine to enter there.

I won Lamartine by my appreciation of his last speech (on Syrian
affairs); I was sincere, as I always am, for, truly, the speech was
magnificent from end to end. Lamartine has been very great, very
dazzling during this session. But what destruction from the physical
point of view! That man of fifty-six looks to be fully eighty; he is
destroyed, ended; he has but a few years of life in him; he is consumed
by ambition, and worn-out by the bad state of his pecuniary affairs.
Émile de Girardin went off to the Chamber, so I had no chance to speak
of "Les Paysans;" it must be for another time. As to Véron, he takes
my novel of "La Cousine Bette;" but we have not yet agreed as to price
and quantity. I am expecting the editor of "La Semaine" M. Hippolyte
Castille. Beside "Les Paysans" to finish, I have eighteen more folios
to do for LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE.


July 19.

I went to bed at half-past six last evening and slept the deepest
sleep, in spite of the 32 degrees of heat which we have here. I am
now ready to work from two to ten in the morning, when Dubochet and
Furne are to breakfast with me. We are to have a conference about the
COMÉDIE HUMAINE, and God knows what will come of it; new griefs and
worries perhaps! So I shall count only on my work and what I earn from
the newspapers for my financial solutions. If I spend the whole of the
month of August in doing "Les Paysans," Véron must have the manuscript
of "La Cousine Bette" the first days of the same month. I shall correct
"Cousine Bette" while I do "Les Paysans."

I wish that all my cases were unpacked, and all my beautiful things
visible; for the anxiety to know in what state they are reacts upon me
too vehemently, especially in the state of irritation I am in from a
continued fever of inspiration and insomnia. I hope to have finished
"Le Vieux Musicien" on Monday, by rising daily at half-past one in the
morning, as I did to-day, being quite re-established in my working
hours. I will tell you to-morrow how many pages I have done to-day; it
must be twelve to satisfy me.


July 20, 1846.

I received your letter yesterday at half-past six o'clock and I could
not answer then, for I had to dine, and after dinner Cailleux (to whom
I had written about the furniture, the Salomon de Caux, etc., and about
the portraits of the king and Madame Adélaïde, which are at Geneva)
chose the hour between eight and nine to come and see my collection. I
had scarcely time to read your letter in the street, and none in which
to answer it.

"Le Vieux Musicien," that novel of fifty sheets, will be finished
Tuesday. Wednesday I take up the other part of "Les Parents pauvres."
This morning I treat with Méry and an editor of "Le Messager." In
spite of the intolerable heat (30 degrees at nine in the morning!)
my activity has never been more violent or my work more desperate; I
am determined to pay integrally the sum total of my debts and win my
independence and peace.

I am very well satisfied with "Le Vieux Musicien;" but "La Cousine
Bette" is only a formless sketch; it is not yet a question of
perfecting it; much has still to be invented.

Well, I must go and do the amount of "copy" I ought to do every
morning. I send you my letters very regularly twice a week, but your
answers are, alas! short and rare. Oh! I entreat you, on my knees, be
less miserly of letters and details; scold me, tell me disagreeable
things, but write me! the sight of your pretty little writing softens
the bitterness of your wrath, which is never very terrible; for no
matter how much you are displeased or even wounded, the angel of peace
and mildness, who pardons and does not punish, is always in you.

Ballard, an editor of the "Messager," and Méry came to breakfast with
me this morning. I need the "Messager;" for thirty thousand francs
are not drawn too easily out of the well of the Parisian press. It
is needful to have the support in the "Débats" of Bertin, in the
"Constitutionnel" of Véron, in the "Presse" of de Girardin, in the
"Messager" of the Minister of the Interior, in the "Musée des Familles"
of Picquée. I have also some other newspapers without any leading
personal influence. Now these articles are more difficult than you
think; they are all invention, labour, drama; the payment is the
object. As for the publishing of books, that is dying out, they say.
The Public is going to sleep; it is necessary to wake up that bored
despot by things that interest and amuse him. Just now, I am very well
content with my "Vieux Musicien." When you read this letter it will be
finished, for I have now reached the thirty-fourth sheet, and there are
but forty-eight. Next week I shall work at "La Cousine Bette" for the
"Constitutionnel;" and as soon as those two manuscripts are delivered
to the compositors I shall finish "Les Paysans." In April I shall do
"Les Méfaits d'un procureur-du-roi;" and this coming winter "Les Petits
Bourgeois" and "L'Éducation du Prince." Will not this have been a
well-employed year, specially when one considers a moving like mine? I
am now searching in the faubourg Saint-Germain, or the rue Royale, for
a house.

And now let me beg of you to drive away all useless and unwholesome
reflections; do not be sad, do not even be pensive; be what you always
are, the providence and joy of your home; be its mind, its heart,
its blessing at all moments; a line of sadness, a word of anxiety in
your letters gives me such pain. I want you happy; that is my special
ambition; and my will is so strong in all which concerns you that I do
not doubt its success in this. There is not a day or a moment in my
life when I would not fling myself into a gulf to save you from care.
That is not a form of speech, it is a sentiment of the heart, deep and
true, and you have always seen it manifested in acts when occasion
offered; what has been done in the past will not fail you in the
future.

Write me often and gaily, and do not tell me you are "obsessed" as
an excuse; I am obsessed, too, by business, work, tramping; compare
the obsession of the world with yours; yet I write to you every day
as one makes one's prayer on rising; but this is because you are my
whole life, you are my very soul, and the slightest, vaguest of your
depressions casts its shadow upon me. Continue to relate to me your
life and all its impressions; hide nothing from me; tell me all,--the
good, the bad, and even the involuntary thoughts.

C... came to see me yesterday; he is bitterly dull; I am alarmed when
I see that the king takes him and M. Fontaine with him five times out
of ten wherever he goes. The king commits the same fault that Napoleon
committed; that is, in wishing to be _all_ himself. There comes a day
when empires perish because the man they rest on perishes or neglects
to supply his substitute. What is certain is that the peace and
tranquillity of Europe hang upon a thread, and that thread is the life
of an old man of seventy-six.

You speak of complications in your affairs; what are they? But, as you
say, we must trust in Providence, for all is danger when we sound the
earth beneath us. I acknowledge that nothing surprises me more than
to see you so troubled about things that you cannot change, you, whom
I have always seen so submissive to the divine will, you, who have
always walked straight before you without looking to one side or to
the other, and still less behind you, where the past like a corpse is
buried. Why not let yourself be led by the hand of God through the
world and through life as you have done hitherto, advancing towards
the future with that serenity, that calmness, that confidence, which
a faith like yours should inspire? I must admit that in this fact
of seeing my star which shines with so pure a lustre thus concerned
about material interests there is something, I know not what, that I
do not like and which makes me suffer. You have already given too much
of your time and your beautiful youth. In spite of your instincts and
your repugnances, you have been mastered by necessity, the welfare of
your child, and your sense of duty. Now that you have fulfilled with
such scrupulous and meritorious thoroughness your obligations to your
adorable daughter, who understands so well all that she owes to you,
and now that you have established her according to the choice of her
heart and in accordance with your own ideas and sympathies, you have
nothing further to do than to let yourself rest in that quietude of
repose which you have so fully earned, giving the burden of business
affairs into the hands of your children, who will continue the work
of your patient and laborious administration. What can you fear for
them, so wise, so enlightened, so sensible, so perfectly united, so
exactly suited to each other? Why foresee events that are hostile to
their safety?--why fear catastrophes which, I like to believe, will
never happen? By spending your strength in creating imaginary dangers
you will have none to defend you against real danger--should any ever
threaten you, which I do not believe will happen.

Doesn't it seem to you rather strange and odd---you who have so
often consoled and sustained me in my troubles and strengthened my
beliefs--that I should insolently take my turn in daring to give you
counsel, I who have constant and incessant need of being sustained,
guided, and sometimes scolded by your high wisdom?

I don't know if you can decipher this shorthand scribbling in haste,
which, according to our agreement, I do not take the trouble to read
over.

Be very tranquil on the subject of nostalgia; I have forbidden my
heart to have any more; it is crushed by toil. Do the same with your
dark ideas; disperse them by confiding them to me and permitting me to
combat them.

Adieu for to-day; to-morrow the continuation of this scribbled
conversation. My tenderest regards to your dear children; you know well
what is in my heart to both of them. Adieu and _au revoir_.



PASSY, July 27, 1846.

I hope my wandering and vagabond troupe will not be alarmed by a thing
which will bring us nearer to each other. For the last five days I
have not felt well, and this morning I went to see my doctor, who told
me an epidemic of severe cholerine was raging, due to the excessive
heat we are suffering at this moment; he has prescribed a strict diet,
and gum-water to drink. I intend, therefore, to rest myself by going
to meet you at Kreuznach and spending three or four days with you if
the mail-cart permits. This illness will be absolutely nothing, and
therefore do not disturb yourself about it; but if not taken in time it
might develop into a case of sporadic cholera. I have given up fruits,
which I ate in abundance. I had no strength, I slept incessantly, and
had to give up all work.

It is probable that I shall buy the Beaujon house. I will bring you the
plan of it. In August and September they are to make the repairs, put
in the heaters and do the painting. In October the upholsterer will
do his work, and in November I can move in. If my affairs go well, I
shall have a year to buy a bit of adjoining ground for a greenhouse
and the indispensable stable and coach-house. Then, perhaps, I shall
stay in this species of chartreuse for the rest of my days, "the world
forgetting, by the world forgot," as Chénier says.

Ah! dear luminous and sovereign star, this time last year we were at
Bourges when posting; but you were ill and sad, even while seeing those
beautiful things. To suffer amid happiness, that is my lot; for am I
not happy in loving you?--yet I suffer here, when I know you to be at
Kreuznach. But it must be, when fettered by work and business as I am
now.


July 28.

This day year we were at Montrichard; and you saw for a few hours the
beautiful valley of the Cher. Ah! how I feel, in thus turning back
to the past, that there is no happiness for me without you; since
yesterday, when I began to rest, I am a prey to one fixed idea,--see
her, listen to her! Do not be affronted, I entreat you, but I need to
see you as we need food when hungry; it is odious, it is brutal, it
is all that is most revolting, perhaps, but it is true. My thought
carries me to Kreuznach at every moment. I must finish my work for the
"Constitutionnel," and then go and book my place in the mail. Shall I
have a letter this morning? I dare not hope it.


July 29.

I found in the post a letter from your children. Anna had put in a
little line which makes me very uneasy. She writes: "Mamma is sad and
ill; you ought to come and help us to cheer her." I went at once and
took my place as far as Mayence, and I shall be there punctually to
meet you; you will not do me the wrong to doubt it, I am sure. Adieu
for to day.


July 30.

The king has again been shot at; you will see it in the papers. It is
truly odious! it will make our unhappy country impossible and hateful
to foreigners. I am very much better; the doctor was a prophet; in two
days all was over and restored in good order; I am still dieting, but
to-morrow I can resume my usual food and my work. The heat has become
more frightful than ever; as I write I am afloat; every pore, every
hair, has its drop of moisture; I am soaked as if I were just out of a
bath.

Last night I saw the fireworks; I had slept all day, so much had
weakness and heat reduced me. The illuminations were very fine; I doubt
if Peterhof ever showed anything finer (in spite of your admirations).
How I wished for you here! and how many times I said to myself that,
positively, you should see it with me next year. In spite of the heat
and the diet, I feel so recovered that I shall go this evening to the
first representation of "Le Docteur noir," and to-morrow I shall return
to my usual ways and my nocturnal work, minus coffee, be it understood;
and on the 17th you will see me at Kreuznach, rely upon it.

The end of "Esther" has had a great success. The letter was like an
electric shock, everybody is talking of it. The profound truth about
our judiciary morals, made dramatic, has startled the men of the robe.
Expect now "L'Histoire des Parents pauvres," and you will see that I
shall make a very fine work of it--but don't feel too much confidence,
for I may deceive myself about it.

So all goes well, and will go better and better. But I love you so
much that there is no other misfortune possible for me than that which
might come to _you_ either in health or feelings. Tears come into my
eyes as I recall certain gestures, certain motions of your dear person
in the dim chamber of my brain where are pictured all your features,
your adorable nature, your heart infinite in goodness, your mind, your
walks with me, our walks along the roadsides, even to your gentle
scoldings--in short, our whole history, in which you have always
been the noblest, purest, most saintly, and most excellent of human
creatures.


July 31.

Forty degrees of heat in my apartment! My weakness is extreme, on
account of the strict diet the doctor ordered me. This will explain to
you the brevity of my talk with you this morning.

Last night I saw "Le Docteur noir;" it is the height of stupidity, of
mediocrity in its saturnalia. I got to bed at one o'clock and did not
rise till nine. I have just returned from the post-office; no letters,
alas! 'Twas a soldier of the "Medusa," looking out on the horizon and
seeing nothing, who came back without letters just now! Well, I must
read and correct my proofs.



PASSY, August 1, 1846.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Kreuznach.]

I have your letter! it is the great event of my life. In it I see two
atrocities; 1st, "Do not come, you would be so bored;" 2nd, "You do not
think enough of your health; you let yourself be worn-out by frantic
work; do take a little more diversion; amuse yourself." _Bored with
you! amuse myself without you!_ Is that enough insult and injustice? Am
I required to refute them?

I am quite well again this morning and I wish to announce that news for
a beginning, so that my dear troupe may feel no more uneasiness about
its illustrious leader.

My doctor is coming to dinner to-day with Méry (one of your believers),
Léon Gozlan and Laurent-Jan. That ought to fully reassure you; I am
now only a man without strength, food, or appetite. But the intestines
are all right again, I believe; and next week I shall finish with the
"Constitutionnel."


August 2.

Dear fraternal soul, I have just finished "Le Parasite," for such
will be, as I told you, the definitive title of what I have hitherto
called "Le Bonhomme Pons," "Le Vieux Musicien," etc. It is--to me at
least--one of those fine works of extreme simplicity which contain
the whole of the human heart; it is as grand as the "Curé de Tours,"
but more clear and quite as heart-breaking. I am enchanted with it; I
will bring you the proofs, and you must tell me your impressions. Now,
I am going to work on "La Cousine Bette," a terrible novel, for the
principal character is a composition of my mother, Madame Valmore and
your aunt. It is the history of many families.

Yesterday my dear star seemed veiled for me; I had many annoyances.
"Le Messager" was ready to reproduce, for one thousand francs, "Madame
de la Chanterie," the proofs of which you and I corrected together
at Lyon; but the publisher, assignee of Chlendowski, was inexorable;
he would not consent to the publication, even in receiving part of
the price. The "Messager" is sent gratuitously to peers and deputies;
it prints a thousand copies. So I failed through the greatest piece
of ill-will I ever met with in my life. This will show you what the
business of literature and publishing is. I am going to send you the
"Courier," in which George Sand is bringing out a novel; for I perceive
that you are reading only the ministerial newspapers, and you ought
also to read a little of the Opposition ones, in order to understand
something of our political mess.


August 4.

At last I have your letter; and now that I have it after wishing for
it so much, I fear that it tired you to write it in such heat. Be
tranquil in mind, as you ought to be in heart; I only bought the Greuze
and the Van Dyck because I have a purchaser at a higher price for
two of my pictures,--namely, "Les Sorcières" by Paul Brill, and the
sketch that Miville sold to me at Bâle. I have exchanged the little
picture bought for fifty francs, which Chenavard said was not worth
two sous, for a delicious little sketch of the birth of Louis XIV.,
called an "Adoration of the Shepherds," in which the shepherds are
bewigged in the fashion of the times. Louis XIII. and his ministers
are represented. Well, well! I shall win your confidence sooner or
later, in bric-à-brac at any rate. You can't imagine to what point I
am fretted and what anxiety fills my mind when I discover that I have
something inferior as a matter of art in my collection. Therefore set
your mind at rest; I follow your good advice exactly; I continually
deny myself; I never yield to any spontaneous fancy; I buy nothing
without consulting, examining, reflecting; and that is the same as
telling you I buy nothing but fine things.

I write to you in 50 degrees of heat, as you will have seen by the
"Débats." My study is 15 degrees higher than that; for the laundry-man
below me keeps a coal fire like that of a locomotive, and above my head
is a zinc roof; in short, I live in a stove. But in spite of this heat
my health gets better and better; nourishment no longer distresses me;
and the intestines are coming back to a normal state. The doctor says
my illness came only from heat, which is to me what it is to you. One
must cling to doing one's duty, as I do, in order to work under this
physical dissolution.

Adieu; proofs are calling me, and I have not, as at Lyon, an
intelligent comrade to correct them cleverly and gaily. I have still
twenty-six sheets to write.


August 5.

I met Potier in the Passy omnibus; I questioned and sounded him, and
gained the certainty that he has another purchaser in view for the
Beaujon house, and considers me only as a _pis aller_; but I cannot put
myself in the way of offering more than I have for the last year.

I saw Véron yesterday, who wants as many folios as I can write. He
told me that the public was not content with Sue's publication; it
was thought repulsive and shameful. The pretty sinners of the great
world think to rehabilitate themselves by making an outcry against
"such revolting immorality," as they call it. On the other hand, Véron
made me many compliments on "L'Instruction Criminelle." At the Palais
de Justice both magistrates and lawyers think it splendidly true and
irreproachably accurate. If they only remembered Popinot, they would
see that Popinot and Camusot are two aspects of the Judge.[1]

I see with joy, by your letter, that you are rather better; also that
you have had an earthquake, which must make Germany uneasy. Suppose a
crater were to open expressly to prove Georges' theories! Oh! how I
wish I knew when you will be really in possession of a prolongation
of your passport. I hope to leave here by the 15th or 20th, but I
absolutely must finish "Les Parents pauvres" first. I have booked my
place for the 15th, but I can exchange it for the 20th if necessary.

Ah! so you are not content with my title of "Le Parasite;" you think
it a comedy title of the eighteenth century, like "Le Méchant," "Le
Glorieux," "L'Indécis," "Le Philosophe marié," etc. Well, it shall
be as your autocratic and supreme will decides, and inasmuch as you
declare that the pendant to "La Cousine Bette," can only be "Le Cousin
Pons," "Le Parasite" will disappear from LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE and give
place to "Le Cousin Pons."

Work, occupation, difficulties in regulating the payments of the last
sixty thousand francs of debt, all that mass of fixed or floating
cares, repress within my heart the desire to see you, and the need
of consulting you and talking over with you my literary and pecuniary
affairs. But as you will not permit me to go to you until I have
finished "Les Paysans," or at least "La Cousine Bette," I endeavour
to obey you. It is the order of the day to me; and it bestows upon me
a strength for work I have never yet known. "Le Cousin Pons" and "La
Cousine Bette" will give me ten thousand francs; that will pay Hetzel,
and the seven thousand francs to my mother. If I can be with you next
winter, counting from September, I shall do three works: "Les Petits
Bourgeois," "Le Théâtre comme il est," and "Le Député d'Arcis," which,
according to my calculation, are worth, taken together, forty thousand
francs. So you see that not only will everything be paid, but I shall
even have money in hand for the rest of the winter. Dear sovereign
star, be very tranquil about my conduct; how do you suppose that at
my age any enthusiasm could make me compromise the result of fifteen
to sixteen years' labour? I shall not ruin myself in buying pictures
any more than I will "bind myself to write novels against the sum that
would free me entirely." In spite of that lofty wisdom of yours, you
are no more prudent and reasonable than I am. I am really ashamed to
repeat these things so often.

No news from Rome; I think there are as many reasons to fear as to
rejoice. To-morrow I write again; but _à bientôt_. I hope to see you.

It is Laurent-Jan and Achard who are doing Grimm's letters; and it is
Laurent-Jan who is just now publishing "Jeunesse" in the "Époque."

[Footnote 1: This refers to the examination of Lucien de Rubempré
before the _juge d'instruction_, and the description connected with it
of the Palais de Justice.--TR.]


August 7.

The heat is so dissolving I cannot write a line: I soak two shirts a
day by merely staying in my arm-chair and reading Walter Scott. I must
love you much to write even these few words; my hand and forehead are
streaming. This delays me and makes me groan. I expect Potier to-day;
I have decided to settle with him if possible before my departure; so
that everything may be done, repairs and all, during my absence, and I
can then remove there on my return.

Adieu, all my thoughts are with you, and with what can make you happy,
were it even at the cost of my life and happiness. Before the end of
the month I hope to see you! I shall work firmly, that there may be no
delay in my journey. I hope you will be satisfied with the work I bring
you. My dear critic will be too tenderly moved to be very severe.



PASSY, October 18, 1846.[1]

[Footnote 1: Balzac's visit to Wiesbaden, Stuttgard, etc., was paid
between the date of the last letter and that of the present one. It
has been stated, on what proof I do not know, that during this visit
Madame Hanska promised definitively to marry him as soon as permission
could be obtained from her government. Before Balzac left Paris he
purchased the little house in the Beaujon quarter, since known as the
house in the rue Fortunée, now rue Balzac, and began to store it with
his treasures of furniture, pictures, and bric-à-brac, many of which,
he says in a letter to his sister, belonged to Madame Hanska.--TR.]

Here I am, dear sovereign star, imperturbably before my desk, at the
hour named, as I announced to you yesterday in the little letter
hastily written in the office of "Le Messager;" and before resuming
my work, my heart, that poor heart all yours, feels an imperious need
to shed itself into your heart, and tell you the little details of
a life become your life through that miracle of thought, constant,
immutable, during so many years of exclusive affection, of which you
alone, besides myself, can appreciate the immensity and the depth. From
Frankfort to Forbach I lived in you only; I went over those four days
like a cat which has finished her milk and licks her whiskers. All the
precautions with which your kindness and that of your dear children
surrounded me, the shawl, the hood, cured my cold perfectly; I feel
admirably well. While they changed the luggage I wrote you a line, to
prevent you from doing yourself harm, so anxious about me did I leave
you.

I paid the duties on the little Dresden service. They told me at the
custom-house that they had orders to send my cases to Paris, and I
asked them to wait till the Wiesbaden cases came so that all might
go together. Custom-houses do not respect heart-griefs, and I had to
leave my reveries and memories (more and more tender beneath the charm
of your smile, and your glance ever present with me) and attend to my
cases. As my cold disturbed my stomach I relayed that organ with two
little rolls and two large slices of Wiesbaden ham between Frankfort
and Forbach. This, I hope, is a sufficient bulletin.

I was alone in the mail, and that was a blessing from heaven. At Metz,
no one. At Verdun I encountered Germeau, coming from Paris with his
wife, and I thanked him for his intervention at the custom-house. When
you come to Forbach in your carriage you will be received with all
the respect due to your social position, and your things will not be
searched, I promise you that. I flew with the mail to Paris and arrived
here at six o'clock in the morning; I went to bed at seven, and got up
at eleven to breakfast. In the midst of my frugal repast the editor
of the "Constitutionnel" fell from the clouds upon me, and found me
half eating, half correcting the proofs of "La Cousine Bette," which
he owned to me was having an astounding success. Véron's anxiety was
consequently all the greater; but I calmed it by telling him of my
journey and assuring him I had come back to finish everything. All this
kept me till one o'clock.

I have written to Lirette, and shall send her your collective letter.
But I shall soon go and see her and give her all details. Here is
the dawn, just breaking; I must leave you, you, who are always there
before me, blessing my work, like the soft white dove that you are.
You will hear with some pleasure, I am sure, that an immense reaction
in my favour has set in. I have conquered at last! Once more has my
protecting star watched over me; once more an angel of peace and hope
has touched me with her vigilant, guardian wing. At this moment society
and the newspapers are turning favourably towards me; more than that,
there is something like an acclamation, a general coronation. Those
who fought me most fight no longer; those who were most hostile to me,
Soulié for instance, are coming back to me. You know that he (Soulié)
made me honourable amends in his new drama at the Ambigu. It is a great
year for me, dear countess, especially if "Les Paysans" and "Les Petits
Bourgeois" are published rapidly one after the other, and if I have the
happiness of doing them well, and if your taste and that of the public
should agree in thinking them fine--Come, tell me to stop, and bring
myself back to "Cousine Bette;" truly, I am talking too much, and with
too much pleasure; but it is to me such delicious, irresistible joy to
throw myself thus wholly into your fraternal soul.

Ah! I have read your pretty letter which arrived the morning after I
had left Paris, as I see by the postmark; had it reached me in time
I would have dressed differently and so escaped my cold. Poor dear,
you see once more in this that I comprehend you at a distance. I was
already at Mayence when your letter reached Passy telling me that as I
was ill I must drop the "Constitutionnel" and come and rest near you.
You have so spoilt me by kindness that I had already done this without
knowing whether you would approve of it.

The time that I have lost on business errands and proposals is really
frightful. Furne is making gigantic announcements of LA COMÉDIE
HUMAINE. I hasten to tell you this as I don't know whether I shall be
able to write to you again for some time. It is now the 20th. This
letter can only go to Dresden, Hôtel de Saxe, and it must even wait for
a line from you before I send it.

_Allons!_ to the pen, and to work!


October 24.

Yesterday I worked like a negro; I wrote the amount of two chapters
and corrected thirty columns of proof which I had on my desk. Just
now, I can only count on money from the "Constitutionnel," or on that
of a treaty by which I should bind myself for another work, but that
other work is quite impossible for me to do. In my present labyrinth
I must work and work without cessation to end, first of all, "Les
Parents pauvres." It is not elegies that will give me money, and I need
some; there is none here just now, at this moment, and I am at the
mercy of certain payments to make, besides which I am expecting cases
from everywhere, Geneva, Wiesbaden, etc. Nevertheless, do not think
of my affairs or cloud the purity of your brow by useless anxieties.
Publications will give something--but when? _Voilà!_

I hoped to find a letter from you at the post-office this morning
telling me where to address you. I have half a mind to send this letter
to Dresden by Bossange; but suppose that by chance you do not go to
Dresden? Evidently I ought to wait for your next letter, which cannot
be long in coming. I entreat you, do not harass yourself about all
this: do not punish me for having believed in the luck of business in
default of other happiness, more complete but impossible. I shall work,
as I have always worked. It is only a habit to resume, not to begin,
which would be more difficult. I feel young, full of energy and of
talent before new difficulties. When I am settled in my little house
at Beaujon [rue Fortunée], very cosy, well furnished, very quiet, safe
from the intrusion of unwelcome persons, I shall write successively
"Les Paysans," "Les Petits Bourgeois," "La Dernière Incarnation de
Vautrin," "Le Député d'Arcis," "Une Mère de famille;" and the plays
will go on as well. It was especially to give myself up to this
immense, but necessary production, that I wished to house myself as
soon as possible at Beaujon, for it is quite impossible to stay longer
at Passy.

Most Parisians think I did not go to Wiesbaden; that it was only a
_canard_; that's Paris! Madame de Girardin told me that she had heard
from a person who knew you well, that you were excessively flattered
by my homage, and sent for me to join you wherever you went, out of
pride and vanity, being much gratified in having a man of genius for
_patito_, though your social position was too high to allow him to
aspire to anything else! And thereupon she laughed satirically, and
told me I was wasting my time running after great ladies, who would
only strand me! Isn't that Parisian? But, as you see, the contradictory
statements of the Paris cancans make them little dangerous.

To-day, all the exterior work on the Beaujon house is finished, except
the gallery which is to be added, and is, in fact, a new building; that
will be covered in this week. So, in this respect, at any rate, I am
tranquil.

It is four o'clock; I must brush up copy; I salute you as the birds are
saluting the dawn.

The combined letter of your dear children has made me very happy. I see
them so contented, so charmed, without the slightest fear of mischance
in the future; but then, how you have brought-up your Anna! morally and
physically how you have trained her! In truth, Georges owes you much,
and I think he feels it, for a brain like his comprehends everything;
there is in him the union of great knowledge and great character.
Pity me to be once more battling with business, the house, repairs,
buildings, contractors; I go from one to the other, on foolish errands
and vexations of all sorts. Yet I must write as if I were tranquil, and
devote myself exclusively to that intolerable and hideous old maid who
calls herself Cousine Bette, when I would much rather be with you and
you only. It is really atrocious; and I never had such a time in my
life. But my faith and belief in you give me a courage, a patience, a
lucidity and a talent that amaze the boldest and most hardened toilers.

Alas! I must leave you; time has marched while I have been talking thus
at random with you. I must carry this letter to the post.



PARIS, November 20, 1846.

I was saying yesterday, dear countess, that I had scarcely more than
time to write to you if I were going to see you on the 6th in Dresden.
But how can I help writing? heart and soul are at Dresden, only body
and courage are in Paris. To talk with you is an imperative need; I
must write to you, tell you, relate to you everything--about my books,
my furniture, my financial calculations, the architect, the house, the
bothers, the nothings, the conversations, just as I talk to myself--are
you not _myself_? have you not long been my conscience? If you were
not, should I have talked to you with such freedom and sincerity of my
follies, my faults,--in short, of all that I have done either of good
or evil?

Yesterday I went to the Vaudeville, where Arnal made me die of laughing
in "Le Capitaine de Voleurs," and I put my letter into the post for
yesterday's mail. It will not go till to-day. This morning I have still
thirty-two pages to do on "Cousine Bette" and sixty-four on "Cousin
Pons." Total, one hundred between now and the 29th. On Friday I shall
go and book my place in the mail.

Ouf! I have just corrected eight hundred lines of "Cousine Bette" and
the eight first chapters of "Cousin Pons." Since this morning I have
not risen from my chair, and it is now a quarter past three. I put wood
on the fire, and think of you, there, as if near me. What happiness
in the idea of soon seeing you again! My whole soul quivers at the
thought. I have such need to be with you three. And to think that I
have still a hundred pages to write and correct!

Decidedly, I shall send to Tours for that secretary and bureau of Louis
XVI.; the bedroom will then be complete. It is an affair of a thousand
francs; but for that money what sort of modern furniture does one get?
bourgeois platitudes, paltry things without taste or value.


November 22.

I have your letters, yours and those of the children. Thanks be to God,
they tell me you are better, and that I can meet you on the 6th at
Leipzig. I have just re-read your letter, for the paper is so thin that
one side of the page prevented me from reading the other in a carriage.
I went to the post, from there to your house, where nothing is getting
on. You tell me not to work so hard, to take care of my health, to
amuse myself, to go into society. But, dear countess, did I not write
you that I had pledged myself to the payment of my last debts, counting
on a rise to sell my shares in the Chemin de Fer du Nord? Well the
Nord fell yesterday from 627 frs. to 575--two hundred francs below
the price at which I bought them. So, you see, my pen must earn what
the shares should have given me, and work to pay my creditors, to
whom I will keep my word. Do you think I have time to amuse myself?
It will be a miracle if I pull through at all. I have almost doubled
in production; I have done forty-eight folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE
instead of twenty-four; and you know that can't be done by scribbling
as I am doing now to you. Ah! _bon Dieu_, it is fearful! I tremble as I
write of it. I am not sure that even that will get me through. I must
finish "Les Paysans" and perhaps something more. It is necessary, even
indispensable. If I go to you I shall hardly see you, for I could not
leave my table and papers. I cannot think about my health, or take any
care or thought of myself; I am a copy-machine, and nothing else. My
courage is really amazing; I recognize that, and you will be convinced
of it when I tell you that since my return from Wiesbaden I have done
all you will read of "La Cousine Bette,"--which, parenthetically, has
a prodigious success--all those twenty chapters, dear countess, were
written _currente calamo,_ done at night for the next day, without
proofs. You have been, this time as ever, my inspiring genius.


November 23, 1846.

Yesterday I went to see Laurent-Jan and proposed to him to dialogue my
play for the Variétés, for I have an avalanche of work up to November
30, and as I want to start December 1, I have no time to do the play.
It would have paid him some thousands of francs, but he declined,
on the pretext that it was too strong, too colossal for his "feeble
talent." The real cause of this touching modesty is his invincible
laziness. Nature gives talent, but it is for man to put it to work
and bring it to sight by force of will, perseverance, and courage.
Now, that fellow has talent, but he will never do anything with it
except spend it in pure waste, wearing it out, like his boots, on the
boulevards, or in the boxes of the lesser theatres with actresses who
laugh at him.

Here I was interrupted by Dr. Nacquart; he scolded me well when he
found me at my table writing, after all he had said to me about it.
Neither he nor any of his friends the doctors can conceive how a
man should subject his brain to such excesses. He said to me, and
repeated his words with a threatening air, that harm would come of
it. He entreated me to at least put some interval of time between the
"debauches of the brain," as he called them. The efforts on "Cousine
Bette," improvised in a week, especially alarmed him. He said, "This
will necessarily end in something fatal."

The fact is, I feel myself in some degree affected; sometimes in
conversation I search, and often very painfully, for nouns. My memory
for _names_ fails me. It is true that I ought to rest. If I had not
had so much anxiety about my last financial affairs, the cares to be
given to the arrangement of my little house would have been a happy
and good diversion to my literary occupations. I have continued to be
unlucky financially. When the doctor made me the above observations on
my literary excesses, I said to him:--

"My friend, you forget my debts. I have obligations which I have bound
myself to meet at certain fixed dates, at the end of each month, and I
will not fail to do so; I must therefore earn money; that is to say,
I must write until I make my chains fall off by force of courage and
toil."

You will never divine the doctor's answer. It paints the man; but start
with the principle that he is a friend, who loves me truly and has not
only much affection, but also much esteem for me.

"Well, my friend," he said, "I can't write fine things like you, but I
manage my affairs better. As a proof, I'll tell you that I bought at
auction three days ago, a house of five stories in the rue de Trévise,
for which I paid two hundred and thirty-five thousand francs; as there
were twenty-five thousand to pay on costs, that makes two hundred and
sixty thousand francs."

The whole spirit, the whole character of our bourgeoisie is in that; it
turns its money over and over, as the aristocracy of old made theirs by
privileges and personal advantages. You must not find fault with the
poor doctor, he is an excellent, worthy man; he is of his caste and his
epoch, that is all.

Regarding what you say to me of your affairs, I shall not cease to
repeat to you, "Make haste!"

You must have read the article in the "Constitutionnel" on Siberia; it
is enough to make persons more confiding than you shudder. Therefore,
do not lose any time, for the future does not seem to me _couleur de
rose_, I assure you. I see Italy and Germany very ready to rise; the
present state of peace hangs by a thread, the life of Louis-Philippe,
who is getting old, and God knows, when the struggle comes, what will
happen to us. For a young and ambitious sovereign, not willing, like
Louis Philippe, to die tranquilly in his bed, see how favourable this
moment would be to recover the right bank of the Rhine! The populations
are harassed by idiotic little sovereigns; England is grappling with
Ireland, which wants to ruin her or separate from her; the whole
of Italy is making ready to shake off the yoke of Austria; Germany
wants its unity, or perhaps, only more liberty. In short, believe it
firmly, we are on the eve of great political catastrophes. In France,
our interest lies in gaining time,--our cavalry and our navy not
being strong enough to make us triumph by sea or land. But the day
when those two arms are strengthened, the fortifications mounted, our
defences finished, and our public works completed, France will be very
formidable.

It must be owned that by the way Louis-Philippe has administered and
governed the country he has made it the first power in the world.
Reflect on that! Nothing is factitious; our army is a fine army;
we have money; all is strong, is real, at this moment. The port of
Algiers, just finished, gives us a second Toulon opposite to Gibraltar;
we advance towards controlling the Mediterranean. We now have Belgium
and Spain with us. Certainly Louis-Philippe has made great way; you
are right in that. If he were ambitious he could sing the Marseillaise
and demolish three empires to his profit. If he puts a paw on
Mehemet-Ali, as he has on the Bey of Tunis, the Mediterranean will be
all for France in case of war. It is a conquest made morally, without
firing a gun. We have, moreover, made giant strides in Algeria by the
displacement of the centres of military action. This means conquest
consolidated, and revolt rendered impossible.

I hope you will be content with me, and will think that I at last do
justice to a sovereign whom you have always supported against me, not
from sympathy, you say, but from conviction. Perhaps you are right in
the main. Perhaps France has less need of glory than of liberty and
security; and inasmuch as she has obtained these two great benefits,
let us wish that she may know how to appreciate them and keep the
government that has given them to her.

Here is the dawn; for two hours I have been talking to you with
pleasure and no fatigue; and I say to you, joyfully, _à bientôt_.[1]

[Footnote 1: This is the last letter to Madame Hanska given in Balzac's
Correspondence in the Édition Définitive of his works. Soon after
writing it he went to Dresden, and brought Madame Hanska, without M.
and Mme. Mniszech, to Paris, in January, 1847,--TR.]



To M. LE COMTE GEORGES MNISZECH, AT WIERZCHOWNIA.

PARIS, February 27, 1847.

My dear Anna and my dear Georges: do not have the slightest uneasiness
about your dear mamma. In the first place, she is here in the strictest
incognito; next she is thoroughly re-assured about her health; and
lastly, charged with the immense duty of taking the place of her
beloved children so essential to her happiness (and I may say to my
own, for all my human affections are centred on three cherished heads),
I have put myself into forty thousand pieces, not to make her forget
those who are the soul of her thought and life but, to render their
absence as endurable as possible.

Our dear Atala [his family name for her] is in a charming and
magnificent apartment (not too expensive); she has a garden, and goes
much to the convent and a little to the theatre. I try to amuse her,
and to be as much Anna to her as possible; but the name of her dear
daughter is so daily and continually on her lips that last night,
as she was amusing herself much at the Variétés and laughing with
all her heart at the "Filleul de tout le monde," played by Bouffé
and Hyacinthe, in the midst of her gaiety she asked herself, in a
heart-rending tone that brought the tears to my eyes, how she could
laugh and amuse herself without her "dear little one." ...

You know that in the month of April I take her back to Germany, and
from there she will go to join you at Wierzchownia. As for me, who
cannot now live away from you, I hope to follow her a little later.