LETTERS DURING 1843, 1844, 1845.



BERLIN, October 14, 1843.

Dear countess,[1] I arrived here this morning at six o'clock,
having had for all rest twelve hours at Tilsit, from which must be
deducted three hours given to the director of posts, to whom I had an
introduction, and who did me so many services that I took tea with him
in the evening. I arrived too late to dine there with Stieglitz, as we
desired.

As long as I was on Russian soil I seemed to be still with you, and,
without being exactly of a frolicking gaiety, you must have seen by my
little letter from Taurogen that I had strength enough left to joke at
my grief. But once on foreign soil, I can say nothing at all, except
that this journey may be made to go to you, but not on quitting you.
The aspect of Russian lands, without culture, without inhabitants,
seemed to me natural; but the same sight seen in Prussia was horribly
sad, and in keeping with the sadness that seized upon me. These barren
tracts, this sterile soil, this cold desolation, this poverty, gripped
and chilled me. I felt myself as much saddened as if there had been a
contrast between my heart and Nature. Black grief swooped down upon me
more and more heavily as physical fatigue increased. But do not pity
me for taking the land journey, because these late storms must have
made the navigation of the Baltic very bad.

I know how you are by the way I feel; I feel within me an immense
void, which enlarges and deepens more and more, and from which
nothing distracts me. So I have renounced going to Dresden; I do not
feel the courage to go there. Holbein's Madonna will not be stolen
between now and a year hence; the scene of the battle and the defiles
of the Kulm will not change, and I shall have a reason, next May,
to make the journey again with other ideas. Don't blame me for my
faint-heartedness; nothing now pleases me in this journey, which did so
please me in the salon of the Hotel Koutaitsof when you said, "You will
go here--and there." I listened to you, I went, for it was you who told
me. But now, how can I help it? far from you all is lifeless, without
a soul. Next year, perhaps; but now, I have nothing but the gulf of my
toil, and I go to it by the shortest way.

I slept this morning from seven o'clock till midday, a few tired,
restless hours. I have breakfasted, dressed, and paid three visits: to
Bresson, Redern, and Mendelssohn; and on my return I sit down to write
to you, for to talk with you is the greatest, the most vital instinct
of the moment.

I was interrupted by Comte Bresson, who came immediately to invite me
to dinner for to-morrow, because he leaves, or rather his wife leaves,
the day after; she goes before him to Madrid. As far as I can judge, he
is a man of intelligence and great good sense; above all, without any
species of pretension, which is rare in diplomatists, and I prize it
much. He advised me to write a line to Humboldt, of whom I saw much in
Paris at Gérard's and elsewhere; he will, no doubt, show me Potsdam. M.
Bresson goes to Spain, and Salvandy to Turin.

I resume my dear laments, and I must tell you that the highway from
Petersburg to Tilsit is only practicable at two sections: from
Petersburg to Narva, and from Riga to Taurogen; so that for more than
half way the road is detestable when it rains, and it had rained a
great deal, alas! Imagine the jolts we made! but the vehicles are
excellent; they resisted them. All that is Russian has a very tough
life. A roadway is laid down across the sands of Livonia with gorse;
out though the road has the gorse _characteristics_, it has, none
the less, a disquieting aspect and a boggy style. It is a miracle to
get over the road in three days and a half; and that gives a great
idea of Russian stubbornness. We had eight horses, and sometimes ten,
in certain places. Where the chaussée [paved road] is made it is
magnificent. Ah! I shall have pleasure in going over it again! but
_then_ it will not be over gorse but flowers that I shall be jolted.
Literally, one eats nothing by the way, for there is nothing to eat;
but the way-stations are very handsome, and there is always excellent
Russian tea. I am therefore able to honour my grief by thinness, due
to the diet of the journey; if I suffered, my mental condition was
such that I did not become conscious of it; the grief of quitting you
quelled hunger, just as the pleasure of meeting you had already quelled
sea-sickness. You are above all.

I am here at the Hôtel de Russie, which is passably good and not too
dear. From Berlin I shall go to Leipzig and Frankfort-on-the-Main, by
the Prussian _Schnell-post_; and from Frankfort to France by steamboat,
or railroad all the way; which is, I think, more economical than any
other way of travelling.

I have found two road companions, two sculptors, one of whom, as I
told you, speaks an almost incomprehensible French, and I have just
made the rounds of Berlin with him. These young men have been full of
attentions to me all the way, especially from Riga, where I parted
from my first companion, the Frenchman. The artist-nature is everywhere
the same. These two young fellows got me out of all difficulties at
inns, and I have just invited them to dinner (a _rapin_ dinner, be it
understood). It is the least I can do for such obliging lads to thank
them for their good care before we part.

This sulky Berlin is not comparable to sumptuous Petersburg. In the
first place, one might cut a score of mean little towns like the
capital of the Brandebourg out of the great city of the vast European
empire, and there would still remain enough space built upon to crush
the score of extracted little Berlins without injury to its vast
extent. But, at first sight, Berlin seems the more populated; for
I have perceived several individuals in the streets, which is not
often the case in Petersburg. However, the houses here, without being
handsome, seem well built; one can see that they are not wanting in
comfort inside. The public buildings, rather ugly of aspect, are of
handsome freestone; and the space around them is so managed as to set
them off. Very likely it is to this artfulness that Berlin owes its
air of being more populous than Petersburg; I should have said more
_animated_ if it concerned any other people; but the Prussian, with his
brutish heaviness, is never anything but ponderous; less beer and bad
tobacco, and more French or Italian wit is needed to produce the stir
of the other great capitals of Europe, or else the grand industrial and
commercial ideas which have caused the great development of London; but
Berlin and its inhabitants will never be otherwise than an ugly little
town inhabited by ugly fat people.

However, it must be admitted, to whoso returns from Russia, Germany
has an indefinable air which can only be explained by the magic word
LIBERTY, manifested by free manners and customs, or, I should say, by
freedom in manners and customs. The principal public buildings of
Berlin are grouped about the hotel where I am, so that I could see them
all in an hour. Fatigue is seizing me; I aspire to dinner: the first I
have eaten since the splendours of Russia.

Till to-morrow, dear countess.

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at St. Petersburg. Balzac has just left
her after a visit of two months.--TR.]


October 15.

Our dinner was composed of soup, venison, mayonnaise of fish, macaroni
with cheese, a little dessert, a half-bottle of madeira, and a bottle
of bordeaux. _Ecco, signora!_ At eight o'clock I dismissed my guests
and went to bed, the first bed that resembled a bed since I left
Dunkerque. Before going to sleep I thought of you and of what you
might be doing at eight o'clock of a Saturday evening. I imagined you
were at the theatre; I saw the Michel theatre; but I did not have the
cruel pleasure, as in _Schnell-post_ or in _Karéta potchtôvaïa_, to
think till midnight, for at midnight I was sound asleep, and in the
morning I slept till eight o'clock. You have so often subdued the most
imperious things in nature that you will pardon poor nature for taking
its revenge for once. Exclusively tender souls have a worship for
memories, and your memory, you cannot doubt it, is always in my heart
and in my thought. I give myself the fête of thinking of it during
that short half-dreaming moment when we feel ourselves betwixt slumber
and sleep; and all the sweet impressions of the two months I have
spent with you return to enchant my soul with their radiant images,
so full of harmony. You see that the Virgin of Poland is the same as
the Notre-Dame of France, and that if my journey is saddened by a
separation such as I have now borne three times, all is otherwise well
with me.

I have received from M. de Humboldt the note which encloses mine; it
is, certainly, curious under present circumstances. I send it to you;
and I can speak of it openly, as this letter will be carried to you by
Viardot, whom I have just met, and who agrees very willingly to take
it; he is one of the most honourable men I know; in whom one can put
the utmost confidence; he will give it into your own hand.


October 16.

I have just dined with Madame Bresson, _née_ de Guitaut. There was a
great dinner at the Embassy on occasion of the King's fête. Except
the ambassadress, everybody was old and ugly or young and hideous;
the handsomest woman, if not the youngest, was the one I took into
dinner; guess who,--the Duchesse de Talleyrand (ex-Dino) who was there
with her son, the Duc de Valençay, who looked to be ten years older
than his mother. The conversation was about people's names and little
incidents happening at court within forty-eight hours. But at any rate,
it explained to me Hoffmann's jests about German courts. Impossible to
join Redern; I had his wife on one side of me,--the face of an heiress,
and a very rich heiress to make him forget such lack of charm.

Nothing can be more wearisome than Berlin. I am consumed with
ennui--ennui has entered me to the bone, and I am afraid of being ill.
I write this before going to bed; it is nine o'clock; but what can one
do in Berlin? For all amusement there's "Medea," translated from the
German, and played literally! Yesterday they played before the court
Shakespeare's "Midsummer Night's Dream," also translated literally! The
King of Prussia protects letters, but, as you see, they are mostly dead
letters.

I leave to-morrow, and go to Leipzig by the railway to reach Mayence;
after which by the same to Dresden to see the Gallery.

M. de Humboldt made me a visit of an hour this morning, charged, he
said, with the compliments of the King and the Princess of Prussia. He
gave me all necessary information as to how to find Tieck at Potsdam,
and I shall profit by it to study the physiognomy of that great barrack
of Frederick the Great, of whom de Maistre said: "He was not a great
man; at the most a great Prussian."

I went out by the railway, and on getting into a carriage I found the
fantastic Duchesse de Talleyrand, with her hair dressed in a mass of
flowers and diamonds, like an apparition of a midsummer night's dream.
She was on her way to court in full dress, to dine with the Princess
of Prussia. We had also for third the Comte de Redern, a mouldy old
Prussian fop, dry as a Genevese and important as a retired diplomatist.
I requested the shepherdess of threescore to lay my respects at the
feet of the princess.

I saw Tieck in his home; he seemed pleased with my homage. There was
an old countess, his contemporary in spectacles, octogenarian perhaps,
a mummy with a green eye-shade, who seemed to me a domestic divinity.
I have just returned; it is half-past six o'clock, and I have eaten
nothing since morning. Berlin is the city of ennui; I should die of
it in a week. Poor Humboldt is dying of it; he drags about with him a
nostalgia for Paris. As I start to-morrow morning by the railway, I
must bid you adieu. I cannot write again until I get to Mayence.

In talking this morning with Comte Bresson, I told him I had been
driven from Petersburg by the tattle of porters and ignoble gossip;
that no one believed in generous and disinterested sentiments, and that
I was angry with the Russian people for attacking my sacred liberty
by imagining that I should do like Loëve-Weymar. M. Bresson strongly
approved; and said that a Frenchman should never marry any but a
French-woman; I told him I was of his opinion, and that was what I
should do! I am told that if I stay here a week fêtes will be made for
me. But a week means three hundred francs, and really, for Berlin, that
is too dear. If I could only get away from this dreadful town by paying
that sum, I don't say it would be too much; I would even add a little
to be off the quicker. More than ever do I see that nothing is possible
to me without you, and the more space I put between us, the more I feel
the strength of the tie that holds me. I live by the past only, and I
live in it only, withdrawn into the depths of my heart. Must it not
be horrible suffering to be alone as I am, with the continual memory
of these two months, from which my thought plucks flowers, blossom by
blossom, with melancholy and religious tenderness?


October 17.

I leave you afresh this morning, for it is like a fresh leaving not
to write to you in the evening what I have done during the day. I go
to Leipzig, where I shall book my place in the _Schnell-post_ for
Frankfort. I shall sleep at Leipzig; the next day go to Dresden, and
return, on the 20th, to take the Prussian conveyance.

The loneliness that takes the place of intimacy has all the ways
of remorse--I feel a violent need of changing from place to place,
stirring, going, coming; as if at the end of this physical agitation
and all these useless movements I should find you. I look with
tenderness at this paper which I shall carry in a moment to Viardot,
thinking how your pretty fingers will hold it in that salon where the
hours fled so sweetly and so rapidly. Viardot will faithfully deliver
to you this packet, in which I may say that my life will be one long
anguish till I see you again. From Mayence you shall have a letter
which will tell you of my acts and deeds after leaving Berlin. I shall
reach Passy about November 10; therefore write me on the 3rd, of your
style.

Adieu; if I have failed in our agreement, if anything displeases you in
this letter, be, as ever, kind and forgive me. Think of my grief, my
loneliness, my sorrow, and you will be full of pity and indulgence for
the poor exile.



DRESDEN, October 19, 1843.

I left Berlin with ennui, dear, but I have found nostalgia here.
Nothing that I eat nourishes me, nothing that I see distracts me. I
have seen the famous Gallery, and Raffaelle's Virgin, also Holbein's,
and I said to myself, "I love my love too well!" In going through the
famous treasury, I would have given all for one half-hour on the Neva.
To add to my troubles I am here for two days longer than I wished to
be; and this is why. From Berlin I went to Leipzig and passed the
night. I had counted without the fair at Leipzig; all the seats were
taken in the _Schnell-post_. I then asked the landlord to book my seat
and keep my luggage, instead of my dragging it to Dresden and back, for
they demand an infinite number of thalers for overweight of luggage.
The landlord said it was doubtful if he could get me a seat for the
20th, the day I wished to start, and I have just received a letter from
him saying I can have no place till the 22nd.

Yesterday, on arriving, having missed the hour for the Gallery, I
walked about Dresden in all directions, and it is, I assure you,
a charming city; very preferable as a residence to that mean and
melancholy Berlin. It has the look of a capital; partly a Swiss, partly
a German town; the environs are picturesque and all is charming. I
can conceive of living in Dresden; there is a mixture of gardens
and dwellings that delights the eye. As for the palace begun by
Augustus the Strong, it is really a most curious masterpiece of rococo
architecture. As a fantasy it is almost as fine as gothic, and as art
it is exquisite. What a misfortune that so enchanting a conception
is unfinished, and is left in a deplorable state. It would take,
of course, millions to repair, complete, arrange, and furnish this
delightful gem. There is nothing in Petersburg, still less in Prussia,
nor in the whole North to compare to it. What a man was that Augustus,
calling himself Elector in Poland, and King in Saxony!

I saw so many Titians in Florence and Venice that those in the Dresden
gallery had less value in my eyes. Correggio's "Night" seemed to me
over-praised; but his Magdalen, two Virgins of his, the two Madonnas
of Raffaelle, and the Dutch and Flemish pictures are well worth the
journey. The treasury is nonsense; its two or three millions in
diamonds could not dazzle eyes that had just seen those of the Winter
Palace. Besides, the diamond says nothing to me; a dew-drop, sparkling
in a ray of the rising sun, is to me more beautiful than the finest
diamond in the world--just as a certain smile is more beautiful to
me than the finest picture. So I must return to Dresden with you in
order that the pictures may speak to me. Rubens moved me somewhat,
but the Rubens of the Louvre are more complete. The true masterpiece
of the Gallery is Holbein's Madonna, which extinguishes all the rest.
How I regretted that I could not hold your hand in mine while I
admired it with that inward delight and plenitude of happiness which
the contemplative enjoyment of the beautiful bestows! The Madonna of
Raffaelle, one expects it; but Holbein's Madonna is the unexpected, and
it grasps one.

Dear countess, you will never form to yourself a complete idea of
my dreadful loneliness. Not speaking the language and not knowing a
person to speak to, I have not uttered a hundred sentences since I
left Riga and that French merchant. I am always in front of myself,
and the scenery being a desert and a plain, I have nothing to
interest the eye; the heart has passed from excess of riches to the
most absolute pauperism. The recapitulation mentally of those hours
that flew by, alas! so rapidly, the dreamy thoughts that followed them
gave such bitter sadness to a nature naturally gay and laughing that
my two sculptors said to me--that is, the one who thought he spoke
French--"What is it? what is the matter?" Another fortnight like this
and I shall gently, gently die, without apparent illness.

I see that I must renounce the Rhine and Belgium and return to strong
occupation in the affairs and toils of Paris. This air does me harm; I
am inwardly debilitated; nothing restores my tone, nothing cheers my
courage, I thirst for nothing. I have two nostalgias: one for the banks
of the Neva which I leave, the other for the France to which I go.

German railway trains are a pretext for eating and drinking; they stop
at every moment; the passengers get out and drink and eat, and get in
only to do it all over again; so that the mail-cart in France goes
faster than the trains in Germany.

It is eleven at night; I am in a hotel where every one is asleep.
Dresden is quiet as a sick-room; I feel no desire to sleep. Have I
grown old that the Gallery has given me so few emotions? or has the
source of my emotions changed? Ah! surely, I recognize the infinite
of my attachment and its depth in the immense void there now is in my
soul. To love, for me, is to live; and to-day more than ever I feel
it, I see it, all things prove it to me, and I recognize that there
will never be for me any other taste, any other absorption, any other
passion than that you know, which fills not only my heart but my entire
brain.


October 20.

Absolutely nothing to tell you but what you already know. I have just
returned from the theatre, which is certainly one of the most charming
I ever saw. Despléchin, Séchan, and Diéterle, the three decorators who
did our French Opera house, came here to arrange it. Nothing could be
prettier. If you choose Dresden for a residence Anna will have the
loveliest hall she ever dreamed of. They sang a German version of "Fra
Diavolo" which seemed to me an excellent preparation for sleep. I had
seen the collections of porcelains and antiquities in the morning. I
feel tired. Fatigue is a power; and I am now going to bed at eleven
o'clock. You know of whom I shall dream as I sleep.


October 21.

I leave to-morrow; my place is booked, and I will finish my letter,
because I wish to put it in the post myself. I have a head like an
empty pumpkin, and I am in a state which makes me more uneasy than I
can tell you. If I continue thus in Paris I must return. I have no
feeling for anything, no desire to live, not the slightest energy,
nor do I feel any will. You will never know until I explain it to you
verbally, the courage I display in writing to you. This morning I
stayed till eleven o'clock in bed, unable to get up. It is horrible
suffering which has its seat nowhere; which cannot be described; which
attacks both heart and brain. I feel stupid, and the farther I go,
the worse the malady becomes. I will write you from Mayence if I feel
better. But as for the present, I can only describe my condition as
Fontenelle, a centenarian, explained his,--"a difficulty of being." I
have not smiled since I left you; it is spleen of the heart; and that
is very serious, for it is a double spleen.

Adieu, dear star thrice blessed! there may come a moment when I can
express to you the thoughts that oppress me; to-day I can only tell
you that I love you too well for my peace; for, after this August
and this September, I feel that I can only live beside you and that
your absence is death. Oh! how happy I should be were I walking and
conversing with you in the little garden overhanging the bridge of
Troïsk, where there is nothing yet but broomsticks to mark where
they mean to plant the trees. To me, there was no garden in Europe
more lovely--when you were in it, I mean. There are moments when I
see clearly the least little objects that surround you; I look at
the cushion with a pattern of black lace worked upon it on which
you leaned, and I count the stitches! Never was my memory so fresh;
my inward sight, on which are mirrored the houses that I build, the
landscapes I create, is now all given to the service of the most
completely happy memories of my life. You could never imagine the
treasures of revery which glorify certain hours; there are some which
fill my eyes with tears. My inward eyes behold those angular bronzes
against which I struck my knees as I wound my way through your blue
salon, and the little chair in which you reposed your dreamy thoughts!
What power and happiness there is in these returns to a past which thus
we see again. Such moments are more than life; for the whole of life
is in this one hour withdrawn from real existence to the profit of
these memories which flood my soul in torrents. What sweetness and what
strength lies in the simple thought of certain material objects, which
attracted but little notice in the happy days that are past; and how
happy I feel myself to feel thus!

Adieu; I am going to carry my letter to the post. All tenderness to
your child a thousand times blessed; my regards to Lirette, and to you
all that there is in my heart, my soul, my brain.



PASSY, February 5, 1844.

Yesterday I did errands; for I must think about getting "Les Petits
Bourgeois" set up by a printer at the cost of a new publisher. I went
to see the successor of M. Gavault, and there I found a summons from
that dreadful Locquin-coquin. No one more audacious than a swindler! he
cries, "Murder! thieves!" to hang his victim. All this stirred my bile,
and as I had been up since three in the morning I felt very weary, and
went to bed at six to rise at four. While I slept the dear journal
came; I put it aside for my waking and have just read it. All these
opposing emotions, some exasperating, others gentle, not to say divine,
have done me harm; I feel exhausted, which seldom happens to me. I
must be at M. Gavault's at nine o clock for consultation with him and
his successor, M. Picard, on the Locquin affair; now, to get there at
nine o'clock supposes breakfasting at seven; and I who have still five
_feuillets_ to write for Hetzel, promised to him for this morning! I
had kept them back in order to have a _calm night_ to search them out;
they needed mind, and my mind was all upset!

I entreat you, do not be worried about the Reviews; it would even be
a pity were it otherwise. A man is lost in France the moment he makes
himself a name, and is crowned in his lifetime. Insults, calumnies,
rejection, all that suits me. Some day it will be known that if I lived
by my pen there never entered two centimes into my purse that were
not hardly and laboriously earned, that praise or blame were equally
indifferent to me, that I have built up my work amid cries of hatred
and literary musketry, and have done so with a firm and imperturbable
hand. My revenge is to write, in the "Débats," "Les Petits Bourgeois;"
which will make my enemies say with fury, "At the moment one might
think his bag was empty he produces a masterpiece." That is what Madame
Reybaud said on reading "David Séchard," "Honorine," etc. You will
read the strange history of "Esther." I will send it to you thoroughly
corrected; you will there see a Parisian world which is, and always
will be, unknown to you, very different from the false world of "Les
Mystères" and ever comic; in which the author, as George Sand said,
applies a whip that strips off all the plasters put on to hide the
wounds he uncovers. You write me: "What a volume is that which contains
'Nucingen,' 'Pierre Grassou,' and 'Les Secrets de la Princesse de
Cadignan'!" Perhaps you are right; I am proud of it (between ourselves).

You will see if the corruption of the Spanish abbé, which annoys you,
was not necessary to develop the history of Lucien in Paris, ending in
a frightful suicide. Lucien had already served as an easel on which to
paint journalism; he serves again to paint the piteous and pitiable
class of kept women; the corruption of the flesh, after the corruption
of the mind. Next comes "Les Petits Bourgeois," and, for conclusion,
"Les Frères de la Consolation." Nothing will then be lacking in my
Paris but _artists_, the _stage_, and the _savants_. I shall then have
painted the great modern monster under all its aspects.

To sum up: here is the stake I play for,--four men have had in this
half-century an immense influence: Napoleon, Cuvier, O'Connell; and I
desire to be the fourth. The first lived on the blood of Europe, he
inoculated himself with armies; the second espoused the globe; the
third has incarnated himself in a people; and I shall have carried a
whole social world in my brain. Better live thus than call out every
evening, "Spades, hearts, trumps!" or find out why Madame such a one
has done such or such a thing. But there will always be in me something
greater than the writer, happier than he, and that is, your serf. My
sentiment is nobler, grander, more complete than all the satisfactions
of vanity or fame. Without this plenitude of heart I could not have
accomplished one tenth of my work; I should not have had this ferocious
courage. Tell yourself often this truth in your moments of melancholy,
and you will divine by the toil-effect the grandeur of its cause.

Your journal has done me good to read, and I shall re-read it again
to-morrow, more than once. It is six o'clock; I must see about
inventing and then writing the little trifles for Hetzel. I leave you,
sending to you all flowers of the heart.

February 6.

Yesterday I went out, but I suffered much; that thief who sues me,
your letter, all these violent and opposing emotions did me harm. If
the colic, as Lord Byron says, puts love to flight it certainly knocks
down imagination; not only have I suffered, but my brain has been as
if veiled. Last night was dreadful, and the waking not pleasant. After
breakfasting, I feel rather better; but I have to go out for current
affairs, and I cannot think of it without repugnance, so weak and
ill do I still feel. I have, nevertheless, corrected the article for
Hetzel, and added _la coda,_ the most difficult part to wrench out. I
still have one horribly difficult chapter to do of three _feuillets_;
after which I shall be delivered. But while breakfasting the idea
of a pretty comedy in three acts came to me; I will tell it to you
if I write it. This week I must finish "Le Programme," and then set
seriously to work on "Mercadet."

I dine to-day with Girardin, and shall pay a visit to M. de Barante
to thank him for his letter. I perceive, sadly, that my hard labour
has aged me much; if I do not go to Germany by the grace of God and
yourself, I shall make a trip on foot among the Alps.

Do not think that I ever tire of the Daffinger. I give it to myself as
a reward when I have done my task, and at night it is there, beside me,
on my table, and I search my ideas in it.


February 7.

I am still not well, and I have even gone to bed during the day; but
I feel a little better now and shall dine with my doctor. I have just
done the article for Hetzel, which will be, like all things wrenched
out in spite of Minerva, detestable. Yesterday I consulted M. Roux
(Dupuytren's successor, alas!), and he strongly advised me that journey
on foot as the only means of arresting the inclination of my cerebral
organs to inflame.

I am now going to two printing-offices to negotiate affairs, and, among
others, to arrange with a publisher for "Les Petits Bourgeois."


February 8.

When I do not suffer in my head I suffer in the intestines, and I have
at all times a little fever; nevertheless, this morning, at the moment
of writing to you, I am well, or rather, I feel better.

Yesterday I talked with a publisher named Kugelmann. He is a German,
who seems to me full of good-will; we shall settle something to-day
when I have done with the "Débats;" I go to Bertin at eleven o'clock.
If the two affairs can be arranged I shall have nearly twenty thousand
francs for "Les Petits Bourgeois." They want to illustrate either
"Eugénie Grandet" or "La Physiologie du Mariage," and have made me
proposals to that effect. If these proposals lead to any result you
shall know it, of course. Yesterday I met Poirson, manager of the
Gymnase, in an omnibus, and he proposed to me to give him the comedy
of "Prudhomme," and have it played by Henri Monnier. That is one of my
crutches for this year; I shall go and explain it to him next Monday;
and if it suits him, I shall set to work upon it immediately, so as to
have it played in March--or rather in May, for March has twice been
fatal to me.

Adieu for to-day, celestial star, implored and followed with so much
religion. Every day I say to myself, thinking of your dear household
of three, "I hope they are happy! that nothing troubles them! that
Lirette sanctifies herself more and more; that Anna goes sometimes to
the theatre (for her health, as she says so prettily); and that madame
will from time to time look down the Neva to where Paris lies." As for
me, I think only of that rococo salon, and so thinking, I make a little
mental prayer to a human divinity, especially about nine o'clock, when
tea makes me think that you are taking yours in the lamplight at that
white table, the yellow wavelets of which I see at moments, together
with the samovar. What friends are things, when they surround beloved
beings! There is even a stupid ivory elephant that returns to my memory
at times. As for the causeuse, the little carpet, the Louis XIV.
screen, and the chair on which you rested your noble, cherished head,
they are objects of worship. Do you feel yourself loved even in the
outward objects to which you have given more real life than living and
moving beings have to me? Your sadnesses make me smile, and I say to
myself, "She was not _then_ sitting in her chair; she was not looking
then at her chimney-corner." But it would have been a pity not to
write those four pages; they are sublime; and were it not for the deep
respect I have for you, I would put them proudly into one of my books,
to give you the enjoyment of seeing how superior you are to scribblers
like the rest of us. That letter is a true diamond as style and as
thought; you have the inspiring influence, dear lady!--

See how I chatter with you! Can I help it? I make my letters one of
those cat-like sensuous joys to which we grow used, and which wrap us
so softly that we forget they are but the _copy_ of their cause!--

Well, one more look at that dear rue Millionne, and a deep, deep sigh,
alas! not to be there. Why should you not have a poet as others have a
dog, a parrot, a monkey?--and all the more because I am a little of all
three, and repeat to you ever the one phrase, "I am faithful!" (Here
the countess throws up her head and casts a superb glance.)

Adieu till to-morrow; I have recovered a little gaiety the last two
days; are some happy events happening to you? God owes them to you.
Have you not suffered enough to expiate the fault of all who surround
you?--for as to you, you have never understood or practised anything
but the good and the beautiful.


February 10.

Yesterday Bertin was ill, but he sent word that the affair held good.
I went to the printing-office, but the publisher did not come; a bad
sign. Here's a strange thing! the printer fell so in love with the
title "Les Petits Bourgeois de Paris" that he wants to buy the book of
me for twenty thousand francs and publish it illustrated! I came home
to dinner and went to bed, for I had this morning to read seven folios
of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE and the whole of Hetzel's article. It crushed me
down. I went to bed after breakfast and slept till dinner-time, and
as I could not sleep again from six in the evening till three next
morning, I took some coffee, and here I am at nine in the evening,
writing at my table.

If I have luck I shall sell the right to illustrate "Eugénie Grandet,"
and the "Petits Bourgeois" affair will come off, and this will bring
me out of these matters (I mean the annoying matters). They played
a new tragedy at the Odéon last night, but I did not go; I reserve
myself for Tuesday, when the "Mystères de Paris" are brought out at the
Porte-Saint-Martin.


February 14.

"Les Mystères" ended this morning at half-past one after midnight. I
did not get back to Passy till three in the morning. It is now one
o'clock, and I am just up. Frédérick Lemaître was in fear of a cerebral
congestion; I found him yesterday at midday in bed; he had just
plunged into a mustard bath up to his knees. Twice the night before
he lost his eyesight. "Les Mystères" is the worst play in the world,
but Frédérick's talent will make a furor for it. As actor, he was
magnificent. You never can describe such effects, they must be seen. I
am satisfied with the success he will give to "Les Mystères," because
it gives me time to finish "Mercadet." The princes were in a proscenium
box, and as the Prince de Joinville had never seen me, the Duc de
Nemours pointed me out to him.

Since then I have written to Poirson that I will go and see him Friday
to agree about "Prudhomme." I am to dine with my old friend the
Duchesse de Castries, who, just now, for one reason or another, renews
her kind attentions to your servant. All my prose is ready for Hetzel.
To-day I dine with Lingay, the man who wanted to put to the profit
of the State, so he said, my talent of observation. He does not seem
vexed with me for my want of compliance, or perhaps he has too much
intelligence not to have understood me.


February 16.

I went out yesterday for much business.

1. A purchaser wants my Florentine furniture. People have come from
all parts to see it, even the antiquity dealers; and they are all in
a flutter of admiration. You don't know what this means. It was the
article in the "Messager" (which you will doubtless read copied into
the "Débats") which has roused all this attention.

2. The matter of "Les Petits Bourgeois" rests, so far, with the
"Débats." But the publisher wants the book; no doubt to illustrate with
"Eugénie Grandet" and the "Physiologie du Mariage."

3. Poirson thinks the idea of the play excellent and proposes to
_guide me!_--and if the execution is equal to the plot, he assures me
of all the advantages I can desire. So I may appear once more before
the public about April 1. Here I am, with "Prudhomme" and "Les Petits
Bourgeois" on my hands; but no money. I must coin it in a manner to
conquer tranquillity for three months. It is terrifying. This is
Shrove-Saturday; I must spend it working, Sunday too, with a fury that
is not French, but Balzacian.


February 17.

You know, dear countess, that there are days when the brain becomes
inert. In spite of my best will I have sat all day long in my
arm-chair, turning over the leaves of the "Musée-des-Familles!"--what
do you say to that?--and in gazing from time to time at my Daffinger,
without finding aught there than the most sublime and charming creature
in the world and not a line of _copy_! I wanted to return to "Madame de
la Chanterie," but I could only write two _feuillets_.


February 18.

I dine to-day with Poirson, the theatre manager.

Yesterday I dined out; a dinner of twenty-five persons at a restaurant;
but what a dinner! It would have cost two or three thousand roubles in
the 60th degree of latitude. I went this morning to see Bertin and have
come home to tell you that all is concluded. Three thousand one hundred
and fifty francs a volume, like those of "Les Mystères." That will make
nine thousand five hundred. I am going to bed, worn-out with fatigue.


February 19.

Shrove-Tuesday, February 19. Oh joy! I have your letter and have just
read it. You ask why I no longer go in the Versailles direction.
Simply because one does not seek that which annoys and displeases. Do
you want to know the only way in which to cease to be to me _unica_ and
_dilecta_? it is to speak of that to me. All that was a bad dream which
must be forgotten in order not to blush for it to one's self. Deprived
of your letters I no longer lived; nor did I live again until once more
I saw your dear handwriting. And you speak to me of Versailles; the
very name sickens me, with the ideas attached to it, and this when I am
so far from you with vast spaces parting us! But you do not know how in
your absence I am deprived of soul and brain. I live by the reception
of one letter, and I no sooner have it than I want another.

Ah! your letter was indeed due me amidst the annoyances and troubles
of all kinds that assail me and the crushing work which implores peace
and has never found it except near you. Even Hetzel, whom I thought a
friend, is getting up with Bertin a foolish squabble with me. If you
only knew in what a fit of misanthropy I went to bed. It was frightful.
But also, with what delight I read those pages so full of sincerity and
affection! One hour of such pure, heavenly enjoyment would make one
accept the martyrdoms of human existence.

Yes, you have every reason to be proud of your child. It is through
seeing young girls of her sphere, those who are the best brought-up
here, that I say to you, and repeat it: you have the right to be proud
of your Anna. Tell her that I love her, for you, whose happiness she
is, and for her own angelic soul which I appreciate so truly. You tell
me, dear countess, that, in the midst of your good success, there is
something in the supreme decision which thwarts you, but you do not
tell me what it is. Please repair that omission; do not let me fancy
evil out of this uncertainty. Nothing, no event in the things of life,
no woman however beautiful, _nothing_ can disturb that which _is_ for
ten years past, because I love your soul as much as your person, and
you will ever be to me the Daffinger. Do you know what is the most
lasting thing in sentiment? It is _la sorcellerie à froid_--charm that
can be deliberately judged. Well, that charm in you has undergone the
coolest examination, and the most minute as well as the most extended
comparison, and all is more than favourable to you. Dear fraternal
soul, you are the saintly and noble and devoted being to whom a man
confides his life and happiness with ample security. You are the
pharos, the light-giving star, the _sicura richezza, senza brama_.
I have understood you, even to your sadnesses, which I love. Among
all the reasons which I find to love you--and to love you with that
flame of youth which was the only happy moment of my past life--there
is not one against my loving, respecting, admiring you. With you
no mental satiety can exist: in that I say to you a great thing; I
say the thing that makes happiness. You will learn henceforth, from
day to day, from year to year, the profound truth of what I am now
writing to you. Whence comes it? I know not; perhaps from similarity
of characters, or that of minds; but, above all, from that wonderful
phenomenon called _entente cordiale_--intimate comprehension--and also
from the circumstances of our lives. We have both been deeply tried
and tortured in the course of our existence; each has had a thirst for
rest in our heart and in our outward life. We have the same worship of
the ideal, the same faith, the same devotion to each other. Well, if
those elements do not produce happiness, as their contraries produce
unhappiness, then we must deny that saltpetre, coal, etc., produce
ashes. But beyond these good reasons, it must be said, dear, that there
is another, a fact, a certainty, the inspiration of a feeling beyond
all else--the inexplicable, intangible, invisible flame which God has
given to certain of his creatures, and which impassions them; for I
love you as we love that which is beyond our reach; I love you as we
love God, as we love happiness.

If the hope of all my life were to fail me, if I lost you, I should not
kill myself, I should not make myself a priest, for the thought of you
would give me strength to endure my life; but I would go to some lonely
corner of France, in the Pyrenees, or the Ariège, and slowly die, doing
and knowing nothing more in this world; I should go at long intervals
to see Anna and talk of you at my ease with her. I should write no
more. Why should I? Are you not the whole world to me? Examining what
I feel in merely waiting for a letter, and what I suffer from a day's
delay, it seems proved to me that I should die of grief. Oh! take care
of yourself! Think that there is more than one life bound to yours.
Take care in everything! Each day my double egotism increases; each day
hope adds to her treasury dreams, longings, expectations. Oh! remain
what I saw you on the Neva!

If you ask me, Madame la comtesse, why I yield myself up to this
verbiage, which, some day soon, will bring a frown to that Olympian
brow, if you would know why I have launched with such a flow upon the
letter-tide, I shall tell you that I have just re-read your letter,
that this is Mardi-gras, and I am taking the sole pleasure that I seek
from the carnival.

Now I must talk health; you will not pardon me if I forget it in
writing to you. I am well, in spite of a slight grippe, and I think
I shall be able to master the enormous work that I must do between
now and March 20. Do not dwell too much upon my troubles and my
toils; do not pity me too much; without this avalanche to sweep away
I should die, consumed by an indefinable ill, called absence, fever,
consumption, nerves, languor--what Chénier has described in his "Jeune
Malade." Therefore I bless heaven for the obligations which misfortune
has placed upon me. I do not count, as I think I told you, on a
theatre success to pay my debts; I count only on the fifty folios of
LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE which I have to do, and which will give me about
fifty thousand francs. It is true that I also expect to bring to a
good conclusion the affair of illustrating "Eugénie Grandet" and the
"Physiologie;" and those two things represent twenty thousand at least.
So I shall fully have enough, and over, for my journey and stay in
Dresden.

Adieu until to-morrow. To-morrow I continue my journal after putting
this one into the post. If you knew what emotion seizes me when I throw
these packets into the box! My soul flies to you with the papers; I
tell them a thousand foolish things; like a fool, I fancy they are
going to repeat them to you; it is impossible to me to comprehend that
these papers impregnated with me should be in eleven days in your hands
and yet that I stay here. Well, you will see that during the last
fourteen days I have been much driven about; I have worked little, I
have thought of you, I have been agitated by the expectation of work
for Frédérick. "Les Mystères" which, thanks to him, have had a success,
little durable however, have cast me on the deserted boards of the
"Gymnase." I am chasing Henri Monnier; you can, on reading these pages,
scribbled in haste, tell yourself that your poor servant is working
desperately; every moment is precious; a scene must be written, a
proof corrected, copy sent. You will therefore have but little from me
as writing, but much as thought in the journal which will follow the
present one.

Adieu. Yesterday I was sad; to-day, thanks to your adorable letter, I
am gay, happy. You are my life, my strength, my consolation; I have
learned through disappointments and bitterness that I have but you in
this world.

Adieu, then; be sure that I live more at the feet of your chair than in
my own.



PARIS, February 28, 1844.

Dear countess; I have decided to finish the seventh volume of LA
COMÉDIE HUMAINE with "Le Lys dans la Vallée" which can certainly go
under the head of "Scènes de la Vie de province." This arrangement
spares me the writing of three volumes which I should not have time to
publish separately first; besides I wish not to have a single line to
write between now and October 1.

In spite of what you tell me of your plans for Dresden, I hardly
believe in them. You leave Petersburg about the middle of May; you
will be at home, at Wierzchownia, by the end of June; how can you
expect between July and October (four months) to be put in possession
of your rights, to have received the accounts of administration
and guardianship, and to have re-established the _status quo_ of
your personal government? Oh! if you only knew with what sadness I
count upon my fingers and add up all these difficulties: the time
required for the journey, the accounts to examine and verify, the
current affairs, and the unexpected hindrances! Such thoughts bring
me dreadful, pitiless, implacable hours. You are my whole life; the
infinitely little incidents as well as the gravest events of that
life depend on you, and solely on you; the two months that I spent in
Petersburg have, alas! sufficiently enlightened me as to that. No, you
can never leave in October, for I know your anxious tenderness for your
child; you would never let her travel in winter,--I have the certainty
of conviction as to that. Do you understand what there is of despair
in those words? Existence was endurable with the hope of Dresden; it
overwhelms me, it annihilates me if I have to wait longer.

You ought to profit by your stay in Petersburg to obtain recovery of
the administration from Anna's guardians, so that there be no one but
you and her uncle to manage her affairs. You will do this, I am sure,
unless you think it simpler and easier to manage at home, I mean in the
chief town of your department, or I should say government, inasmuch as
your provinces are divided into governments, not departments, as they
are in France.

In any case, dear countess, when you return to Wierzchownia examine
well the _ifs_ and _buts_, the _fors_ and the _yes and nos_, and decide
whether I may go to you. If your high wisdom decides that I cannot, I
shall ask of toil its absorption and its excitements in default of the
resignation which I cannot promise you. _Mon Dieu_, one year lost! It
is a lifetime for a being who finds a life in a day, when that day is
passed with you.

I leave you to dine with M. de Margonne and to pay a little visit to
the Princesse Belgiojoso, who lives next door to him.


February 29.

I had yesterday, after writing to you, a violent rush of blood to the
head. From three in the morning till three in the afternoon I corrected
without pausing six folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE ("Les Employés"), into
which I inserted passages taken from the "Physiologie de l'Employé,"
a little book, written in haste, about which you know nothing. This
work, which was equivalent to writing in twelve hours an 8vo volume,
brought on the attack. My nose bled from yesterday until this morning.
But I feel myself more relieved than weakened by this little natural
bleeding,--beneficial, I make no doubt.

I have been to fetch the proofs of what I have so far done
on "Les Petits Bourgeois." The printing-office is close to
Saint-Germain-des-Prés; the idea came to me to enter the church, where
they are painting the cupola, and I prayed for you and your dear child
at the altar of the Virgin. Tears came into my eyes as I asked God to
keep you both in life and health. My thought streamed even to the
Neva. Perhaps, returning from those heights, I have brought back a
gleam from that ideal throne before which we kneel. With what fervour,
what ardour, what abandonment of myself, do I feel bound to you
forever,--"for time and for eternity," as the devout people say.

On my way home I bought, for fifteen sous on the quay, the "Mémoires de
Lauzun," which I had never read.[1] I looked them over in the omnibus,
returning to Passy, where your serf, having reintegrated himself into
his arm-chair, is writing this to you while awaiting dinner. What a
strange thing that an honourable, courageous man, who seems to have had
plenty of heart on all occasions when he needed it, could dishonour
with such levity the women he professed to love! I think conceit, being
the dominant feature of his character, smothered what was really good
and generous within him. Does he not sub-suggest to us that he would
not have Marie-Antoinette in the flower of her youth and the prestige
of her grandeur? It was an odious calumny and a useless cruelty, when
we think of the position of that poor queen at the period when these
Memoirs were being written, In other respects this poor Lauzun makes
one pity him; he never so much as suspects, while believing himself
adored, that he was never loved, even feebly. A man so vain is not
endured by the majority of women, who want an exclusive worship for
themselves, and will not accept, unless for a moment, the presence
of a rivalry as aggressive as it is insatiable--that of a lover of
_himself_. So, we see how Princesse C... quickly quitted him; it is
frightful.

After reading and closing that bad book, I cried out to myself, "How
happy he is who loves but one woman!" I persist in that opinion; it is
both a cry of the heart and the result of reasoning and observation;
for I analyze you with the utmost coolness, and I recognize, with
conviction and joy, that none can be compared to you. I do not know
in this world a finer intellect, a nobler heart, a gentler or more
charming temper, a nature more straightforward, a judgment more
sure, based on reason and virtue. I will say no more, for fear of
being scolded; and yet, _this_ is what explains and justifies an
enthusiasm stronger to-day than it was in 1833; which sends the blood
in waves to my heart at sight of that page of poor Töpfer, which will
lie on my table all my life; which transports me as I look at the
Daffinger. Ah! you do not know what passed within me when, in that
courtyard,--every stone of which is engraved in my memory, with its
planks, its coach-house, etc.,--I saw your sweet face at the window. I
no longer felt my own body, and when I spoke to you I was stultified.
That stultification, that arrested torrent, arrested in its course to
bound with greater force, lasted two days. "What must she think of me?"
was a madman's phrase that I said and resaid in terror. No, truly,
and believe it absolutely, I am not yet accustomed to know you after
all these years. Centuries would not suffice, and life is short! You
saw the effect during those two months in Petersburg. I left you in
the same ecstasy in which I was the day I saw you once more. Of all
the faces you made me see and know in Petersburg none remain in my
memory. All have fled, evaporated, leaving no trace. But I can tell
with certainty the smallest little detail of everything about you,
even to the number of steps to your staircase, and the flower-pots
that are massed at its angles. Of my apartment at Madame Tardif's,
nothing remains in my mind; nothing of Petersburg either, unless it be
the bench on which we sat in the Summer Garden, and the steps of the
Imperial Quay where I gave you my hand. Oh! if you knew how precious
to me is that pin which rolled along the quay! I have fastened to my
mantel-piece, on the red velvet which drapes the side of it, a leaf
of your ivy, that lustrous ivy which frightened you! Well, that leaf
casts me into endless reveries. My dinner is brought; I must stop until
to-morrow.

[Footnote 1: Armand Louis de Gontant Biron, Duc de Lauzun; born 1747,
executed 1793.--TR.]


March 1.

On waking at two this morning, I took up your journal number 10, which
I read very rapidly yesterday and have now re-read; I have given
one hour to it; it is now three o'clock--can it be one hour? It is
a thousand hours of paradise! What a strange thing! you say to me
regarding the month of October the very fears I expressed to you a
short time ago. Have we two thoughts? You tell me of the pain in your
heart, and I was praying for your health in Saint-Germain-des-Prés! You
are surely not ignorant that your life is my life, your death would be
mine; your joys are my joys, your griefs my griefs. There was never in
the world an affection like it; space has no part in it; I have felt
my heart beat violently when I read your account of the throbbing of
yours. And that page in which you say such gracious truths about my
deep, unalterable, infinite attachment to you leaves me with moist
eyes. No, such a letter makes all acceptable, burdens, griefs, all
miseries! Yes, dear, distant yet present star, rely on me as you would
on yourself; neither I nor my devotion will fail you more than the life
in your body. At my age, dear fraternal soul, what I say of life may be
believed; well, then, believe that for me there is no other life than
yours. My plan is made. If harm happens to you, I shall bury myself in
some hidden corner of the world, unknown to all; this is no vain saying.

If happiness for a woman is to know herself alone and singly in a
heart, filling it in a manner indispensable, certain of shining in
a man's intellect as its light, certain of being his life's blood
pulsing in his heart, of living in his thought as the substance of that
thought, and having the certainty that this is and ever will be--ah!
then, dear sovereign of my soul, you can say that you are happy, happy
_senza brama_, for such you are to me--till death. We may feel satiety
for things human, there is none for things divine; and that last word
alone expresses what you are to me.

No letter has ever made me feel more enjoyments than the one I have
just read. It is full of a dear, delicate wit, so graceful, of an
infinite kindness, wholly without paltriness. That forehead of a man of
genius which I have so admired is visible everywhere. Yet, I have been
to blame; how could I ever have thought that what you would do would
not be well done, and properly done? From the point of view of the
world, that jealousy was pretty, and perhaps flattering to some women,
but from the point of view of an affection as exceptional as mine, it
was a distrust for which I blame myself and entreat you to pardon me.

The idea of your novel is so pretty that, if you want to give me an
immense pleasure, you will write it and send it to me; I will correct
it and publish it under my own name. You shall not change the whiteness
of your stockings, nor stain your pretty fingers with ink to benefit
the public, but you shall enjoy all the pleasures of authorship in
reading what I will preserve of your beautiful and charming prose.
[This book was "Modeste Mignon."]

In the first place you must paint a provincial family, and place the
romantic, enthusiastic young girl in the midst of the vulgarities of
such an existence; and then, by correspondence, _make a transit_ to the
description of a poet in Paris. The friend of the poet, who continues
the correspondence, must be one of those men of talent who make
themselves the kite-tails of a fame. A pretty picture, could be made of
the _cavaliere serventi_, who watch the newspapers, do useful errands,
etc. But the dénouement must be in favour of this young man against
the great poet. Also there must be shown, with truth, the manias and
the asperities of a great soul which alarm and rebuff inferior souls.
Do this, and you will help me; you will make me win the sympathy of
certain choice minds by this employment of a leisure I lack so much.
What a temptation for a soul like yours!

Adieu for to-day; leisure lacks and toil is calling. To-morrow I will
re-read your adorable letter and answer it.

March 2.

Yesterday I had that tiresome judge from Bourges to dinner. The vote
of the Chamber on Queen Pomaré kept him late; and it followed that
having been up since two in the morning I went to bed at half-past
eight and slept all night like a dormouse. So my work is compromised,
and I am heavy, without ideas, without activity. The regularity of my
hours saves me. I am expecting the Florentine furniture; meantime, I
have re-read that adorable letter. Suzette's death seems to me a small
calamity. She was gay, she loved you, and that is a great claim to
my remembrance, in which she will remain eternally, if only for her
arrivals at the Arc with your missives. Dear countess, I entreat you,
never fight my battles, either for me or for my works. I am afraid of
some trap set for your good friendship and your gracious, sympathetic
partiality. The best way to hoax critics is to satirically agree with
them; carrying the matter farther than they reckoned or wished, and
when you have enticed them into absurdity, leave them there. The more I
think of it the more charming do I find the idea of your novel. Write
it out for me and I will use it.

Nodier died as he had lived, with grace and good-humour; in full
possession of his mind and sensibility, of his head, in short; and
religiously,--he confessed and desired to receive the sacraments.
He died not only with calmness, but with joy. Five minutes before
his death he asked for news of all his grandchildren, and said: "Are
none of them ill? Then all is well." He wished to be buried in his
daughter's marriage veil. Mass was said in his room, and he heard it
with great collectedness. In short, his conduct was becoming, gay,
charming, gracious to the last moment. He sent me word that he had been
deeply touched by my letter, that he regretted dying before he had
brought the Academy to repair its injustice towards me, that he had
always wished I might be his successor there and hoped I should be. I
give you these details, knowing the interest that you will take in them.

You may have thought me a little cool about the announcement of your
suit being won; and, in truth, if I am glad of it, it is especially in
knowing that you are at last delivered from legal annoyances. Believe
that though I am little solicitous of fortune for myself (no matter
what is said of me), I am too devoted to you not to wish you all the
comforts of ease; because one cannot enjoy life or what it offers of
good and charming if forced to struggle against ill fortune. If I am
destined to live always apart from you, I shall not think the less,
with childlike joy, that you are free from cares in the present and
in the future, that you are enabled to do good to those about you
according to the compassionate and generous instincts of your kindness,
and I shall say, with the satisfaction of Pehméja, "I have nothing, but
Dubreuil is rich." Let us believe, however, that the future will not
be gloomy for me either, from this point of view at least; and that,
my debts once paid, I can give myself up to the leisure and repose so
awaited, so longed-for, so dearly bought, before I sleep the eternal
sleep in which we rest from all, especially from ourselves.

Meantime, my garden is greening; there are fresh young shoots; before
long there will be flowers; I will put some in my letter before
closing it. The page of your letter produced by that engraving of
Töpfer, and the infinite pleasure the latter caused me have given fresh
impetus and new vigour to my courage. With such support and such words,
waiting is no longer heroism, it becomes a duty. Yes, I suffer much,
more perhaps than you can believe, to be nailed, chained here, while
you, free in all your actions, are absent and so far away. But hope
rocks us ever! so persuasive, so obliging is she that she succeeds in
reassuring me, and even in convincing me that the reality will not
forever escape me.

When I am thus calmed, and the inspiration and enthusiasm of work takes
part in it, all goes fairly well; but it does not continue. Alas! there
are moments when discouragement is so strong and lassitude so complete
that work becomes impossible to me; my faculties are no longer free; I
am distracted from my thoughts by something imperative, inexplicable,
arbitrary, which rules my brain and grasps my heart. There is a form, I
know not what, which goes and comes, which crosses my room and returns,
which lays its finger upon me and says: "Why work? what folly! why wear
yourself out in this way? Think that a few months more and you will
see her. Amuse yourself while waiting!" I am not romancing, believe
me; I am telling this as it happens, be it revery, hallucination, or
no matter what phenomenon of a wearied brain that wanders. But I soon
return to my _fixed idea_; I take up the past, crumb by crumb; I make
myself happy in it; I am with the future like children with the white
cloth that hides their New Year's gifts, and I return to your letters
as to the pasture of my soul.

I entered a church to-day, to pray and to ask God for your health, with
an ardour full of egotism--as all fanaticisms are. I was afraid; I
dared not pray. I said to myself, "This is so full of selfish interest
perhaps I shall irritate him." And I stopped suddenly, like a bigoted
old woman, or a silly schoolgirl. To this are we brought by force
of preoccupation, or to speak more truly, obsession. This is what we
become when we have but one idea in the brain and one sole being in the
heart.


March 4.

I don't know whether it is a phase of the brain, but I have no
continuity of will. I plot, I conceive books, but when it comes to
execution, all escapes me. I have turned over and over a hundred times
your idea for a novel, which is a very fine thing; it is the duel
between poesy and reality, between the ideal and the practical, between
physical poesy and that which is a faculty, an effect of the soul. I
will do that work; it may become something grand and noble. But at this
moment all has fled me; there is some evil influence, as if a sirocco
had swept across the strings of a harp; a memory, a nothing, a turning
backward, the caprice of some elf that wants a prey--all dissolves my
energy and beats me down, body and soul. Well, why not let it consume
a portion of my time, that sacred and sublime passion? I am so happy
in loving thus! But it is a frightful extravagance! I am royally a
spendthrift! "Les Petits Bourgeois" is there, on my desk, the "Débats"
has announced it; you know in whose name the book is written; yet I
dare not touch it. That mountain of proofs terrifies me, and I rush
to the banks of the Neva, where there are no Petits Bourgeois, and I
plunge into a blue arm-chair, so enticing to the _far niente_.

What reading can ever give me the pleasure of those dry, academic
notices of Mignet, or any of those books that I picked up at random on
the table of your salon, while awaiting the rustle of a silk gown. If
I could draw I would make from memory a sketch of the moujik lighting
the stove! I see that little bit of cord unsewn from the back of the
causeuse under the ivy--such are my grand occupations! Now and then
I go over in memory the gowns I have seen you wear, from the white
muslin lined with blue that first day at Peterhof to the magnificence
of a robe all covered with lace, with which you adorned yourself to go
to parties. Ah! 'tis the best poem known by heart that ever was or will
be--the verses, stanzas, cantos of those two months!

Yes, I shall never have loved but once in my life, and, happily, that
affection will fill my whole life. But I must leave these sacred orgies
of memory, for I desire to appear with éclat in the journal.

I put into this packet the first flower that has bloomed in my garden;
it smiled to me this morning, and I send it laden with many thoughts
and impulses that cannot be written. Do not be astonished to find me
so garrulous, saying the same thing for the millionth time; I have no
other confidant than you, you only. Never in my living life have I said
one word of you, nor of my worship, nor of my faith; and probably the
stone which will some day lie above my body will keep the silence I
have kept in life. Therefore, there was never in this world a fresher,
more immaculate feeling in any soul than that you know of. I hope that
the Cyclop of toil will soon return, but not to chase away entirely the
Ariel of memory.

Adieu; try to think a little of him who thinks of you at every moment,
as the miser of his hidden hoard; as the pious heart of its saint.



PASSY, October 11, 1844[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Wierzchownia.]

Dear countess, I have received your letter of September 25; it came
last night, that is, in fifteen days only. I am not very well;
yesterday I went to the doctor; the neuralgia must be fought with
leeches and a little blister; that will take three or four days. I
have been doing "César Birotteau" with my feet in mustard, and I am
now writing "Les Paysans" with my head in opium. Within ten days I
have written six thousand lines for the "Presse;" I must get through by
October 30. Your letter is still another reason for haste; for if you
travel, I must be ready.

My illness has reached a height. This inflammation of the coating of
the nerves, caused undoubtedly by a strong draught, produces pain
effects just as scene painters produce scenic effects. For fifteen
nights I have worked at "Les Paysans" in spite of my sufferings. So
you see there has been no journey to Belgium. Do not be uneasy, dear
countess; your advice as to the travelling lady is not needed; I had
already told myself that, for your sake, I ought to pay attention to
the follies of public opinion; we have, as usual, thought alike.

It is four in the morning; I must go to bed and put leeches into my
right ear; but I would not let these three days be added to your
expectation. Before M. Gavault's departure, thirty thousand francs
had been offered for Les Jardies; but the value of land in the Allée
des Veuves is increasing, and I have told the notary to stop the
negotiation. Was this wise? I shall wait; perhaps I shall find a house,
ready built and cheap. This neuralgia hinders me very much; for I have
to do a work for Chlendowski, who is a great wrangler, just as you
predicted; you were right, as usual; I may be paid, but one thing is
very certain, I will do no more business with him.

How right you were to give me some hope for Dresden or Frankfort,
because, during these last days, I have been so unhappy while working;
I wanted to quit everything and go to you at Wierzchownia. Leave
me hope; is it not all I have? Ah! if you have understood the sad
and tender words I say to you, you must look upon yourself, if not
with pride at least with a certain complacency. The greatness of my
affection renders petty all the great difficulties of my life. I have
amazed everybody by saying that I shall do the twenty thousand lines
of "Les Paysans" during the month of October. No one believed me; not
even the newspaper. But when they saw me writing six thousand lines
in ten days they were awe-struck. The compositors are reading the
work, a thing that does not happen once in a hundred times; a murmur
of admiration runs through them; and this is the more extraordinary
because the work is directed against the multitude and democracy.

Your letter has been much delayed; in my impatience I demanded the head
of all the Rzewuskis, except yours; do not frown that aristocratic
brow, but think of my toil, my sufferings without comfort!

I am glad you have seen clearly about the poor nun! [1] She abandoned
you only for God; and that was a little your fault; your example,
your reading, your advice, led her there forcibly. Do not be uneasy
about her; she is happy where she is; she hopes to be soon received as
novice. I hope that if you wish to send her anything you will make use
of me. At the present moment I can easily give her in your name one or
two thousand francs without embarrassing myself in the least. I am a
rich pauper just now.

You say you have still time to receive a letter from me before your
departure. I hasten, as you see, to send you my news of mind and body.
I have not been out of the house for twenty days. In point of fact I
live in the condition of stupidity produced by forced labour. I have,
besides, my little Hetzel articles to do. That poor fellow wants to
sell twenty thousand copies of "Le Diable," and he has printed fifteen
thousand. Your serf has contributed thereto a quantity of that sly
nonsense which pleases the masses. To have paid twenty thousand francs
of debt, and to find myself in December on the road to Dresden, "Les
Paysans" finished, that is my dream, and a dream that must, and will,
be realized; otherwise, I don't know how I could live through 1845.
There comes a moment for the _madness_ of hope; and I have reached
it. I have so strained my life to this end that I feel all within me
cracking. I would I did not think, and did not feel. Oh, how can I
tell you of the hours I have sat, during these twenty days, leaning on
my elbow, and looking at the salon in Petersburg and at Wierzchownia,
those two poles of my thought, of which the south pole was before me in
its frame. Hope and reality, the past, the future, jostled one another
in a medley of memories that gave me a vertigo. Ah! you stand there
indeed, in my life, in my heart, in my soul; there is hardly a motion
of my pen, nor a thought of my mind that is not a ray from the one
centre, you, you only, you too well beloved--whatever you may say to it.

The death of your cousin Thaddeus grieves me. You have told me so
much of him that you made me love one who loved you so well. You have
doubtless guessed why I called Paz Thaddeus, and gave him the character
and sentiments of your poor cousin. But while you weep for his loss
tell yourself that I will love you for all those whose love you lose.
Poor, dear countess, the situation in which you are and which you
depict so well has made me smile, because it was exactly my own before
your last letter. "Shall I or shall I not do 'Les Paysans'?" "Shall
I or shall I not start?" "What ought I to do? Ought I to bind myself
to my work? Ought I to refuse it?" and so forth. I cut the knot by
going to work, saying to myself, "If I do go, I will drop all as at
Lagny in 1843." Nacquart said to me brutally yesterday, while writing
his prescriptions, "You will die." "No," I said, "I have a private
God of my own; a God stronger than all diseases." "I hope," he said,
"that if you marry, you will take two years for rest." "Two years,
doctor!--why, I shall rest till my last breath, if by rest you mean
happiness."

[Footnote 1: Madame Hanska's governess and companion, Mlle. Henriette
(Lirette) Borel; who became a convert to the Roman Catholic Church, and
took the veil in Paris, as will be seen later--TR.]


October 16.

This interruption, dear, is the result of the doctor's prescriptions.
I have not left my bed; leeches were necessary and blisters for three
or four days; but this morning the symptoms and the atrocious pain of
this inflammation have ceased. In three days, at the latest, I can
resume my work. These few days given to doctoring have been days of
pleasure to me; for, when I am not working with that absorption of all
the mental and physical faculties I can think unceasingly of 1845; I
arrange houses, I furnish them, I see myself in them, I feel myself
happy there. I go over in my mind all those moments, so few, that we
have spent together; I quarrel with myself for not having prolonged
those hours of sweet and intimate converse.

Dear, ungrateful one; you have hardly noticed my persistency in
satisfying your little wish for autographs. I send you to-day one of
Peyronnet; I shall try to get you those of all the ministers who signed
the duly ordinances.

Are you really satisfied with this young man? [1] Examine him well,
and without predilections, for such excellent prospects for your child
will certainly contribute to make the suitor seem perfect. But I don't
know why I should advise prudence and shrewdness to one who has stolen
all the wits of the Rzewuskis, and has eyes at the tips of her little
white-mouse paws. At any rate, dear countess, manage your affairs
wisely, and, above all, soften the Governmental dragon of the North.

I am exactly like a bird on a branch; it is necessary that I should
leave the rue Basse and go elsewhere, where I can be more suitably
lodged. I am like my dear traveller, with her packages and provisions.
I dare not do anything; for if I go to Dresden for four months I ought
to postpone incurring expenses; besides, I would rather incur them
definitively then than provisionally now. My nature abhors change; that
is an aspect of my character you have already been forced to recognize,
and will recognize more and more; you will even admire it, and end by
no longer thanking me for the things of the heart; discovering that
this vast devotion is warranted by the Rzewuski intellect and the
charms of the person whom you see in your mirror.

How could you recommend me your perfumer? I have thought much about
him. I anathematize Viardot for not having told me of his arrival; you
should have had your supply before now. But if we meet in Dresden, dear
countess, you shall have perfumes for the rest of your days, I will
answer for that. We have the same vices, for I too carry the passion
for delicate scents to a fault.

Alas! I must bid you adieu; but remember that you have left me nearly
a month without letters, that you are not in Paris and have no
feuilletons to excuse you. Apropos, I have been three times to the
Arsenal, but have not yet obtained Nodier's autograph; but I shall have
it.

They tell me that David has finished my bust in marble, and that
the marble is not less fine than the cast. It will be, no doubt, in
the next Exhibition. You can hardly imagine how I regret not having
bought that malachite vase; I have found, for three hundred francs, a
magnificent pedestal which would have spared me the immense cost of the
one I had made here in bronze.

I am still ill and must now stop. Perhaps I shall be able to give you
better news before closing this letter.

[Footnote 1: Count Georges Mniszech, a suitor to her daughter, and
subsequently Anna's husband--TR.]


October 17.

All is well; the neuralgic pains have disappeared as if by magic, and
if I have not finished my letter it is because I have slept twelve
hours running under the quietude of non-suffering.

Adieu, dear beloved sovereign. Examine well that young Count Mniszech;
it concerns the whole life of your child. I am glad you have found the
first point, that of taste and personal sympathy, so necessary for
her happiness and yours, satisfactory. But study him; be as stern in
judgment as if you did not like him. The things to be considered above
all are principles, character, firmness. But how stupid of me to be
giving this advice to the best and most devoted of mothers!

I resume work to-morrow. I cannot give you any news of Lirette, having
been unable to go to her convent while my illness and its prescriptions
lasted.

I hunger and thirst for your dear presence, star of my life, far
away, but ever present. Perhaps you think thus of me, sometimes. Who
knows? But alas! you have written to me very little of late. I, so
occupied by work, so often ill, I write to you nearly every day. Ah!
the reason is that I love you. I feel your indifference, I was going
to say ingratitude, deeply; so exasperated am I by this interval of a
whole long month. You would be frightened if you knew what ideas plough
through me. And then, when the letter comes at last, all is forgotten.
I am like a mother who has found her child. But I must not let my
letter end with reproaches.

Find here all my heart, all my faith, all my thought, and all my life.



PASSY, October 21, 1844.

I am perfectly well again and have gone back to work. This is a piece
of good news worth telling you at once. But oh! dearest, a year is a
year, don't you see? The heart cannot deceive itself; it suffers its
own pains in spite of the false remedies of hope--Hope! is it anything
else than pain disguised? I look at that Colmann sketch of the salon,
and every look is a stab; the thought of it enters my heart like a
sharp blade. Between that sketch and the picture of Wierzchownia is
the door of my study,--and that door represents to me infinite space,
spreading away among the memories attached to that furniture, to those
blue hangings. "We were there together; she is now there and I am
here!" That is my cry, and each look, each stab redoubles it. Why did
not Colmann paint the other side of the salon? Why not have done the
stove and the little table before the stove, beside which you said to
me things so compassionate, so sweet, so fraternally reasonable? Ah! I
would give my blood to hear them once again.

Madame Bocarmé has returned. Bettina adores your serf, in all honour
and propriety. She tells me that Colmann's fifty water-colours are
masterpieces, and he is to Russia what Pinelli is to Rome.

I went out for the first time yesterday. I bought a clock of regal
magnificence, and two vases of celadon not less magnificent. And
all for nearly nothing. Great news! a rich amateur has a desire for
my Florentine furniture. He is coming here to see it. I want forty
thousand francs for it. Another piece of news! The Christ of Girardon,
bought for two hundred francs, is estimated at five thousand, and
at twenty thousand with Brustolone's frame. And yet you laugh, dear
countess, at my proceedings in the Kingdom of Bricabracquia. Dr.
Nacquart is violently opposed to my selling, even at a great price,
these magnificent things. He says: "In a few months you will be out
of your present position by this dogged work of yours; and then those
magnificences will be your glory." "I like money better," I replied.
So, you see, Harpagon played poet, and the poet Harpagon.

Dear, believe me, I cannot always suffer thus. Do you reflect upon it?
Another delay! When "Les Paysans" is finished, and the articles for
Chlendowski also, I claim a word from you permitting me to join you
in your steppes, that is, if your difficulties in obtaining a passport
still continue and are permanent.

I have found a most splendid pedestal for David's bust, which every
one says is an amazing success. This beautiful thing cost me only
three hundred francs, and the late Alibert, for whom it was made, paid
fifteen or sixteen thousand francs for it.

Dear countess, I should like your advice on something I want to do.
It is impossible for me to remain where I am. A few steps from my
present lodging is a house which could be hired for a thousand to
fifteen hundred francs, where one could live as well on fifteen hundred
francs a year as on fifty thousand. I am inclined to hire it for a
number of years and settle in it. I could very well economize and lay
by enough to buy a small house in Paris, if I did not live in it for
some years. One can come and go between Passy and Paris as one likes,
with a carriage. But to settle myself in it would cost very nearly
six thousand francs, and I would not make that outlay for the King of
Prussia, when I have twenty thousand francs to pay between now and
January 1. All could be made smooth by the sale of that Florentine
furniture. The "Musée des Familles" does not publish the engravings
of it and Gozlan's article till December, so that public attention
will not be aroused till January. The bidding will be between the
_dilettanti_ and capitalists as soon as they see and know what it is.

As to your plan, I would rather renounce tranquillity than obtain it
at that price. When a man has troubled his country and intrigued in
court and city, like Cardinal Retz, he may evade paying his debts at
Commercy; but in our bourgeois epoch a man cannot leave his own place
without paying all he owes; otherwise he would seem to be escaping
his creditors. In these days we may be less grand, less dazzling,
but we are certainly more orderly, perhaps more honourable than the
great seigneurs of the great century. This comes, probably, from our
altered understanding of what honour and duty mean; we have placed
their meaning elsewhere, and the reason is simple enough. Those great
seigneurs were the actors on a great stage, who played their parts to
be admired; and they were paid for doing so. _We_ are now the paying
public which acts only for itself and by itself. Do not, therefore,
talk to me of Switzerland or Italy, or anything of that kind; my best,
my only country is the space between the walls of the _octroi_ and
the fortifications of Paris. If I leave it, it will only be to see
you, as you well know. I should have done so already had you permitted
it. Therefore, work with your little white-mouse paws to enlarge
the hole of your jail, so that the hour of your liberation may come
the sooner. Formerly I lived by that hope: now I die of it. I have
feverish impatiences, doubts; I fear everything,--war, the death of
Louis-Philippe, an illness, a revolution; in short, obstacles are
ever springing up in my agonized imagination. I see how your personal
affairs hamper and weary you; and your inexhaustible kindness wearies
also.

Thinking sadly of all this, looking out into the void for your
interests and those of your child, I have thought of an admirable
affair in which one hundred thousand francs risked might make colossal
returns. I mean the publication of an encyclopedia for primary
instruction. If well planned, the fame of a Parmentier is in it; for
such a book is like a potato of education, a necessity, a fabulous
bargain. I have faith in such an affair, and I am at this moment
considering the manuscript. Oh! if you were here, or at least in
the same city, how well things would go! what new courage I should
have! what fresh sources would gush up! But absence gives drouth and
sterility to ideas as well as to existence.

I am glad that young Mniszech pleases you as well as the dear child.
Keep me _au courant_ of matters so important for the future of both of
you. In heaven's name, write me regularly three times a month. Think
of my work and how you are everywhere in my study. When I look at your
surroundings I cannot help taking a pen and scribbling a few words as
full of affection as they are of murmurs. If I go to Dresden, I shall
postpone the affair of the house.

Adieu; take care of your health, your child, your property, since they
preoccupy you to the point of making you forget your most faithful
friends.



PASSY, February 1, 1845.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska at Dresden.]

Could I write to you safely before receiving your counter-order, for
your last letter told me not to write to you at Dresden? Since that
letter I have only had a few lines written in haste, in which the
_status quo_ was maintained and to which there was no way of answering.

I have even a certain uneasiness in observing that you do not speak
of my last letters. One of them contained an article entitled "Les
Boulevards," and I asked your advice about it. There is one observation
that I wish to make, merely for the sake of clearing the matter up. I
am sure that you send your letters to the post by some unfaithful hand,
for the two last were not prepaid, and you had doubtless given the
order to do so. Therefore, either prepay them yourself or do not prepay
them at all. Let us begin, as we did at Petersburg, in each paying
our own letter. Take, I entreat you, habits of order and economy. In
travelling, you will have incessant need of your money; it is bad
enough to be robbed by innkeepers, without letting others do so. For
the twelve years that I have now known you I have posted all my letters
to you with my own hand.

Poor dear countess! how many things I have to say to you! But first of
all, let us talk business. Without your inexorable prohibition I should
have been in Dresden a month ago, at the Stadt-Rom, opposite to the
Hotel de Saxe, and if you have raised it let me know by return mail.
As you are fully resolved, and your child also, to see Lirette again,
there is but one means of doing so, and that is to come to Paris. And
the only way to make that journey is as follows: Come to Frankfort
and establish yourself there; then propose a trip on the Rhine; begin
with Mayence, where you will find me with a passport for my sister and
niece. From there you take the mail-cart and go to Paris, where you can
stay from March 15 to May 15, without a word to any one. After which
you can return to Frankfort, where I will join you later. As you will
have seen no one during the few days you are first in Frankfort, you
will attract no attention, and no one will notice you on your return.
Only be sure you get from your ambassador a passport for Frankfort
_and_ the banks of the Rhine.

I shall have found, meantime, for both of you, a small furnished
apartment at Chaillot, not far from Passy. You can see the great city
at your ease _incognito_. There are a dozen theatres for Anna, as she
likes them so much, and you want to amuse her. That will give you
plenty to do, without counting your visits to the convent, which would
be more frequent than those to the theatre if you consulted your own
tastes; but your tastes are so mingled with those of your daughter,
and you spend your lives in each sacrificing to the other so much,
that it is impossible to tell which of you wants a thing or does not
want it. You need spend very little, if you are willing to travel like
a bachelor, and keep a total silence on the escapade.[1] You will see
the Exhibition, the theatres, and the public buildings, and I will
have tickets for the concerts at the Conservatoire; in short, I shall
arrange that you shall enjoy all that can be put into two months. There
is my plan.

But in such things, boldness and secrecy, little luggage, only the
simple necessaries, are required. You will find what you want here, of
better quality and cheaper than elsewhere,--that is, comparatively to
the prices I have seen you pay for your gowns and chiffons in Italy
and Germany. At Chaillot you shall find a nice little apartment and
servants--cook, maid, and valet--for two months. In the morning you can
go about Paris on foot, or in a _fiacre_, to diminish distances. In
the evening you would have a carriage of your own. If you follow this
programme and do not go into society, there is no possibility of your
meeting any one.

Nevertheless, my good angels, reflect well, and do not let your
affection for your friend entice you too much. Weigh all the
inconveniences and dangers of this journey; however immense would be to
me the pleasure of showing Paris to both of you, explaining it to you,
and initiating you into its life, I would rather renounce it all than
expose you to anything that might cause regret. Examine, therefore, all
I have foreseen, and if you think the risks too great, renounce our
mirage. We must not give ourselves eternal regrets for two months of
a pleasure that is only delayed,--that of seeing the face of a friend
through the bars of a convent.

[Footnote 1: Secrecy was required, as Russians in those days were not
allowed to travel in foreign countries without a special permit from
their government, which was difficult to obtain.--TR.]


February 15, 1845.

Dear countess; the uncertainty of your arrival at Frankfort has weighed
heavily upon me; for how could I work, expecting every hour a letter
which might make me start at once? I have not written a line of the
conclusion of "Les Paysans." This uncertainty has disorganized me
completely. From the point of view of mere material interests it is
fatal. In spite of your fine intelligence, you can never comprehend
this, for you know nothing of Parisian economy, or the painful
straits of a man who tries to live on six thousand francs a year. For
this reason, I must quit Passy; but I dare do nothing, I can make
no plans on account of your uncertainty. But the worst of all is
the impossibility of occupying my mind. How can I throw myself into
absorbing labour with the idea before me of soon starting, and starting
to see you? It is impossible. To do so I need to have neither head nor
heart. I have been tortured and agitated as I never was in my life
before. It is a triple martyrdom, of the heart, of the head, of the
interests, and, my imagination aiding, it has been so violent that I
declare to you I am half dazed,--so dazed, that to escape madness I
have taken to going out in the evening and playing lansquenet at Madame
Merlin's and other places. I had to apply a blister to such disease.
Luckily, I neither lost nor won. I have been to the Opera, and dined
out twice, and tried to lead a gay life for the last fortnight. But now
I shall try to work night and day, and finish "Les Paysans" and a bit
of a book for Chlendowski.

I send you by the Messageries the eleventh volume of LA COMÉDIE
HUMAINE, in which you will find "Splendeurs et Misères des
courtisanes." The fourth volume contains _your_ "Modeste Mignon" and
the end of "Béatrix," also "Le Diable à Paris." These books may perhaps
amuse you; but in any case, tell me your opinion of them as you have
always done,--namely, with the sincerity of a fraternal soul and the
sagacity and sure judgment of a true critic. If the reduction of my
bust by David is made in time, I will send you that also.

Not only is the finishing of "Les Paysans" an absolute necessity before
which _all_ must yield relatively to literature and the reputation
which I have for loyalty to pen engagements, but it is an absolute
necessity for my interests. This year is a climacteric in my affairs.

Within forty-live days the printing of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE will be
finished. The publishers have put the two largest printing-offices in
Paris on it, and I am obliged to read twice the usual number of proofs.
The result will be a sum of importance to me. But I cannot leave Passy
till my present debts are paid. Therefore I must finish "Les Paysans"
and LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE, and "Les Petits Bourgeois" and "Le Théâtre
comme il est." But, dear countess, you have made me lose all the month
of January and the fifteen first days of February by saying to me:
"I start--to-morrow--next week," and by making me wait for letters;
in short, by throwing me into rages which none but I know of. It has
brought a frightful disorder into my affairs, for instead of getting
my liberty February 15, I have before me a month of herculean labour,
and on my brain I must inscribe (to be rejected by my heart) the words:
"Think no longer of your star, nor of Dresden, nor of travel; stay at
your chain and toil miserably."

Dear, what I call toil is something that must be seen, no prose
can depict it; what I have done for a month past would lay any
well-organized man on his back. I have corrected the thirteenth and
fourteenth volumes of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE, which contain "La Peau
de Chagrin," "La Recherche de l'Absolu," "Melmoth réconcilié," "Le
Chef d'œuvre inconnu," "Jésus-Christ en Flandres," "Les Chouans,"
"Le Médecin de campagne," and "Le Curé de village." I have finished
"Béatrix;" I have written and corrected the articles for "Le Diable
à Paris;" and I have settled some affairs. All that is nothing; that
is not working. Working, dear countess, is getting up regularly at
midnight, writing till eight o'clock, breakfasting in fifteen minutes,
working till five o'clock, dinner, and going to bed; to begin again
at midnight. From this travail there issue five volumes in forty-five
days. It is what I shall begin as soon as this letter is written. I
must do six volumes of "Les Paysans," and six folios of LA COMÉDIE
HUMAINE, inasmuch as that is all that is needed to complete the
edition, which is in seventeen volumes. I hope for another edition in
1846, and that will be in twenty-four volumes, and may give me two
hundred thousand francs.

So this is my report on the affairs of your servitor and the journey of
your Grace.

Now, let me come to that which is more serious than all,--I mean that
tinge of sadness which I see on your Olympian brow. What! because a
crazy woman cannot be happy, must she come and spoil your comfort
and trouble your heart? And you listen to her, _you!_ Take care, for
that is a crime of lese-comradeship, lese-brotherhood. And you write
me things mournful enough to kill the devil. In your last but one
letter you propose to me gracefully, with those Russian forms you must
have borrowed for the occasion, a little congress in which the two
high powers should decide whether or not to continue their alliance
offensive and defensive. That, my dear lady, is, believe me, a greater
crime than those you joke me about; for I have never needed any such
consultation.

Since 1833, you know very well that I love you, not only like one
beside himself, but like a see-er, with eyes wide open; and ever since
that period, I have always and ceaselessly had a heart full of you. The
errors for which you blame me are fatal human necessities, very truly
judged by your Excellency herself. But I have never doubted that I
should be happy with you.

Dear countess, I decidedly advise you to leave Dresden at once. There
are princesses in that town who infect and poison your heart; were it
not for "Les Paysans" I should have started at once to prove to that
venerable invalid of Cythera how men of my stamp love; men who have not
received, like her prince, a Russian pumpkin in place of a French heart
from the hands of a hyperborean Nature. In France, we are gay and witty
and we love, gay and witty and we die, gay and witty and we create, gay
and witty and withal constitutional, gay and witty and we do things
sublime and profound! We hate _ennui_, but we have none the less heart;
we tend to things gay and witty, curled and frizzed and smiling; that
is why it is sung of us, to a splendid air, "Victory, singing, opens
our career!" It makes others take us for a frivolous people--we, who
at this moment are applauding the disquisitions of George Sand, Eugène
Sue, Gustave de Beaumont, de Toqueville, Baron d'Eckstein, and M.
Guizot. We a frivolous people! under the reign of money-bags and his
Majesty Louis-Philippe! Tell your dear princess that France knows how
to love. Tell her that I have known you since 1833, and that in 1845 I
am ready to go from Paris to Dresden to see you for a day; and it is
not impossible I may do so; for if Tuesday next I am lucky at cards at
Comtesse Merlin's, I shall be on Sunday, 23d, at the Hôtel de Rome in
Dresden, and leave on the 24th.

Dear star of the first magnitude, I see with pain by your letter that
you commit the fault of defending me when I am blamed in your presence,
and of taking fire on my account. But you don't reflect, dear, that
that is a trap set for you by the infamous galley-slaves of society's
galleys, to enjoy your embarrassment. When persons say ill of me before
you, there is but one thing to do,--turn those who calumniate me into
ridicule by outdoing what they say. Tell them: "If he escapes public
indignation it is because he is so clever he blunts the sword of the
law." That is what Dumas did to some one who told him his father was a
negro: "My grandfather was a monkey," he replied.

No, when I think that I might leave here January 1, reach Dresden
the 7th, and stay till February 7th, thus seeing you one whole month
without detriment to my affairs, that I could then return to my desk
happy, refreshed, full of ardour for work, a transport seizes me which
eddies and whirls like steam as it hisses from its valve. I see that
you are completely ignorant of what you are to me. That does honour to
neither your judgment nor your penetration. To-day, that delightful
escapade has become impossible to me. March 1, I must regulate the sale
of Les Jardies; the legal formalities must be fulfilled in order to put
that precious thirty thousand francs aside; LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE must be
finished to obtain the fifteen thousand francs that are due to me for
it; and finally, I must make up the sixty-three thousand for my acre,
if I buy it, and to pay off twenty-five thousand of debt which would
otherwise prevent my becoming a land-owner.

Villemain is at Chaillot; he is no more crazy than you or I. [Minister
of Public Instruction till 1844, and Secretary of the Academy.] He
has had a few hallucinations which have affected his ideas, just as
I had some that affected my use of words in 1832 at Saché; I have
related that to you already; I uttered words involuntarily. But he is
so thoroughly cured that he speaks of the matter with the wisdom and
coolness of a physician. He had already declined very much in talent,
and was no longer fit to negotiate with the clergy, and they profited
by his resignation to get rid of him. We talked of it, he and I, for
more than two hours. From what he told me, I judge that he is forever
lost to public life.

Adieu; I perceive that I bid you adieu in my letters as I said
good-night to you at Petersburg in the Hotel Koutaitsof, when we walked
for ten minutes from the sofa to the door and from the door to the
sofa, unable to say a final adieu. If I could do the second part of
"Les Paysans" in eight days, I would be off, and see you in six days!
Tell yourself that there never passes an hour that you are not in my
thoughts; as for my heart, you are always and unceasingly there.

The winter has set in with great severity. You are right to stay in
Dresden. Avoid, I entreat you, those sudden changes from heat to cold
and cold to heat of which you tell me. It is right to think, as you do,
incessantly of your child; but it would be wrong, and not loving to
her, to always forget yourself for her. Of all the personages whom you
mention to me none but Countess L... attracts me. That amiable old lady
who welcomed you as the daughter of Count Rzewuski goes to my heart,
she belongs to my world. As for Lara, do me the pleasure not to receive
him in future.

Did I tell you that they named the _bœuf gras_ this year Père Goriot,
and that many jokes and caricatures are made upon it at my expense?
This is a scrap of news. I am vexed not to go to Dresden, for I had
not the time when I was there solely to see the Gallery, to view
the country about and go to Kulm, in order to write my "Bataille de
Dresde." That will be one of the most important parts of the "Scènes de
la Vie militaire."

_À bientôt_; take care of yourself, and tell your dear child all
tenderly loving things from one of the most sincere and faithful
friends she will ever have, not excepting her husband, for I love her
as her father loved her.



PASSY, April 3, 1845.

I have just received your letter of March 27, and I know not what
to think of all you say to me of mine. I, to give you pain, or the
slightest grief! I, whose constant thought is to spare you pain! The
epithet _meutrière_ applied to my language makes me bound. _Mon Dieu_,
however good my intentions were, it seems that I have hurt you, and
that is enough. When we see each other, you will comprehend, perhaps,
how the uncertainty that hovers over me is fatal; fatal to my interests
so seriously involved; fatal to my happiness because I see myself
separated from you--for a month more at any rate, for I have not
written a line and I could not now be at Frankfort before the first
week in May. Under such irritating circumstances it was permissible to
be impatient. Besides which, I write my letters very hastily, and never
read them over. I say what is in my mind without any reflection; if I
had re-read that letter I might have made of it (as I have of others
_in which I raised my voice too high_) a sacrifice to Vulcan.

However, let me tell you that there are two hearts here that are full
of you and love you for yourself only: Lirette and I. Lirette, with
whom I have been talking at her convent grating of your situation,
shares my ideas wholly as to the future about which I have made
allusion, and apropos of which I have, perhaps indiscreetly, given
you some really wise counsel. As to the personal dangers _to me_ of
which you speak, those are things I laugh at; you are not as familiar
with them as I. Here, in Paris, there are plenty of persons who
dislike me and would be glad to have me out of the world, men who
have hatreds that are more than ferocious against me, but who bow to
me all the same. It is possible that, like Carter when he undertook
to tame two lions, I might find your Saxons rather too ferocious and
my lion-taming trade a little too visible. But I can assure you, dear
countess, that if that fear is the cause of the dreadful three months
I have just passed, ah! dear fraternal heart, I should be the one to
say the words which I have kissed in your letter: "I forgive you!" I
have contemplated those words with tears in my eyes; in them is the
whole of your adorable nature. You thought yourself affronted by your
most faithful servant, the most devoted that ever could be, and you
forgave him. I have been more moved by that than by all my griefs
put together. Oh! thank you for the pain that makes me fathom your
perfection; pardon me for having misjudged you; be _you_, yourself, as
much as you wish; do all that you will, and if, by impossibility, you
do wrong, it shall be my joy to repair the broken armour. I was wrong.
I was guilty and very guilty, because to goodness one should ever
respond by gentleness and adoration. Write me little or much, or do not
write me at all; I shall suffer, but say nothing. Do what you think
best for your future and that of your child; only, do not root yourself
too firmly in the present; look always before you, and tear out the
brambles in the path before you follow it.

Another academician is dead, Soumet, and five or six others are
declining to the tomb; the force of things may make me an academician
in spite of your ridicule and repugnance.

I have done everything I could to remain at Passy, where I live
tranquilly and comfortably, but all has failed. I have notice to leave
in October of this year, and I must move to Paris and live for two
years in an apartment, until I can build a little house at Monceau.
I shall look for one in the faubourg Saint-Germain. This removal
means the spending of several thousand francs, which I regret. My
money-matters, even more than my work, imperatively require me to stay
in Paris through April.

I am almost certain of recovering my habits of work and those of food
and sleeping; and if the difficulty of the lodging were only solved, I
should have tranquillity of soul, for this house is at my disposition
and I can remove at my ease, working here till the last moment.

Sunday, half-past two o'clock.

I have just risen. I look at my Daffinger with delight. At last I
received your letter, yesterday. Imagine, dear, what a real misfortune
happened to me. Your letter had a spot of ink which glued it to
another letter, and delayed it, as was stated by the post on its
envelope. The post-mistress, who for two days had seen my anxiety,
cried out eagerly when she saw me, "Monsieur, here's a letter!" and
held it for me to see with a joy that did her honour. And what a
letter! I read it, walking gently along in solitary places. To read
things so charming addressed to one's self is enough to make one never
write a line again, but lie at the feet of one's sovereign like her
faithful dog. Finally, I went to sleep, for I must own I had not closed
my eyes for two days, so much did this delay disquiet me.



PASSY, April 18, 1845.

You write me, "I want to see you!" Well, then, when you hold this
letter between your dainty fingers may they tremble a little, for I
shall be very near to you, at Eisenach, at Erfurt, I don't know where,
for I shall follow my letter closely. This is Friday; I shall leave
Sunday at the latest.

What! you could receive an order from your government to return to your
own country, and I not see you! Oh! dear countess; and you tell me I
have been amusing myself. But you know my life from the letters in
which it is written down day by day, hour by hour, minute by minute;
you have surely read, you surely know that my only pleasures are
thinking of you, and proving it to you by writing. I have spent these
last five months in saying to myself every day: "I start to-morrow; I
shall see her! if only for a month, for two minutes, I shall see her!"

Do not write again; expect me.

I am grieved that you have read "Les Petits Manèges d'une Femme
vertueuse" without waiting for the Chlendowski edition in Vol. IV. of
LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE, where it bears the name of "Béatrix," the last
Part. Have you received the two lines which told you the state I was in
from Monday to Sunday? "I shall see her!"--a thought which has defrayed
many a journey of seven hundred leagues.

I have sent everything to the right-about--COMÉDIE HUMAINE, "Les
Paysans," the "Presse," the public, and Chlendowski, to whom I owe
ten folios of the COMÉDIE HUMAINE--hum! also my business affairs, a
projected volume (which I will do as I travel), and my affair with
the "Siècle;" in short, all. I am so happy to go that I can't write
steadily; I don't know whether you can read this, but you will see my
joy in my scribbling. Read "intoxication of happiness" for all the
words you can't decipher. Tell the people about you that, having gone
to Leipzig on business, I am coming to Dresden from politeness, to bid
you adieu before your return to your own country. Have an apartment
engaged for me at the Stadt-Rom; I need three rooms: a small salon,
bedroom, and study. I shall have to work from five in the morning till
midday. But from midday till after seven o'clock I shall be with you,
and bid you good-night by eight o'clock. As you see, there is no place
for a Saxon or a Pole in all this.

This time I bid you adieu without pain, for my trunks are packed, and I
am now going out for my passport and my proofs.

I should not like to be lodged under the roof at the Stadt-Rom, as I
was at my first hasty visit to Dresden; not higher than the second
floor. I shall bring my sad hippocrene with me, my coffee; for seven
hours a day is the least I can work, with all I have to do. Now I leave
you; adieu! This time, I am certain of seeing you soon, and sooner
perhaps than you think.[1]

[Footnote 1: Balzac joined Madame Hanska at this time in Dresden, and
they travelled in Germany and Holland; after which Madame Hanska and
her daughter accompanied him to Paris, where they stayed some time.
This visit was kept a profound secret lest it should reach the ears of
the Russian government.--TR.]



PASSY, September 8, 1845.

Dear star, alas! so distant! No, I cannot accustom myself to see you
again beaming upon me through such space. No, truly, I cannot bear it.
Tell me, for pity's sake, in your next letter where you will be early
in October, and I shall be there too; do not doubt it. How and when is
my secret, and I shall not return to Paris till you set out for home
with your smala.

It is now decided that I am not to move again. I meet with people who
do not keep their word, and I am released from the obligation of doing
twenty-five folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE. I have only thirteen to do,
and I can roast those with a turn of my hand. What need have I of
money? I need to see you, and I am going back to you. I know very well
we shall no longer have any freedom in our walks or our talks, and that
many duties will too often deprive me of the charm of your incomparable
companionship; but chance will favour me sometimes with a blessed ten
minutes, when I can tell you in a mass what I feel in detail; and if
chance should be against me, at least I should see you, I could look
at you. I should hear your sweet voice, I should know you were really
there, that distance was abolished between us, that we were both in
the same land, the same town. My affection for you is so great and so
minute, or, if you like it better, so puerile, that I even grieve on
eating a good fruit, thinking that you have none; and the notion takes
me to eat no more, so as not to enjoy a pleasure of which you are
deprived. Ah! believe me, you are the first and the last, or rather the
sole and the continual thought of my life.

I have come to an understanding with that old gambler on the Bourse,
Salluon, who owns the house of which I told you, and shall look at the
place to-morrow.

Royer-Collard is dead. He was the counterpart of Sieyès.

I went yesterday at two o'clock to see Madame de Girardin. I went on
foot, and returned on foot. She said to me several times that I ought
to present myself for the Academy; although they desire, this time,
to put in Rémusat, who has not many claims. But do not be uneasy, I
know how it would vex you, and you may feel assured that in this, as
in everything else, I will only do what you wish. I returned by the
post-office, thinking you more generous to me than you are in reality.
I said to myself: "She will have found two letters at Frankfort, and
the little case from Froment-Meurice [goldsmith], and she will send me
just a line outside of her regular missive." Nothing! I was sad. I send
you volumes, and you only give me what is agreed upon.


September 10.

This morning I have only ten more _feuillets_ to do to be done with
Chlendowski, that is to say, to complete "Les Petites Misères;" and
to-morrow I begin the last part of "Splendeurs et Misères." That means
six folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE still to do. This will take fully ten
days; that brings me to the 30th. Evidently, I could start the first
week of October, from the 1st to the 5th, and I could be in Dresden the
10th to return here November 5th. That would be nearly a month, dear
countess! Do not neglect as soon as you receive this letter to send me,
1st, Anna's arms, blazoned; 2nd, your own; 3rd, those of Georges; ask
him to make me those three little drawings that I may have exact models
made of them, and if there are supporters tell him to draw those also;
it is possible that Froment-Meurice may find effects there which he
can make use of in the things he has to make for Georges and Anna.

I have recovered my faculties, more brilliant than ever, and I am now
sure that my twelve folios, which will be two novels of six folios
each, will be worthy of the former ones. I tell you this to quiet
the anxiety of your fraternal soul in regard to the reaction of the
physical on the mental, and to prove to you for the hundred-millionth
time that I tell you everything, not concealing the smallest scrap of
either good or evil. Go therefore to the baths of Teplitz or elsewhere,
if you think it necessary, provided you are faithful to your promise of
Sarmate. Meantime I shall reduce my work to its simplest expression,
and about April 20 I shall go North to contemplate you in the midst of
your grandeurs.

Laurent-Jan has been here; he distracted my mind and amused me, but he
stole three hours.

Well, I must end this little conversation, a pale joy in comparison
to our real talks, embellished by the charms of presence, and the
certainty of reality. This is Wednesday, and I have still no letters;
how is it you did not write me a line from Frankfort, acknowledging
the two letters, and the package from Froment-Meurice. I am lost in
conjectures and very unhappy.


September 12.

At last, I have your letter. Oh, _mon Dieu!_ who knows what a letter
is? I tremble all over with happiness. To know what you are doing,
where you are, what you are thinking, is happiness to me here. What a
fine page that is on families of cathedrals and cemeteries. Ah! it is
you who know how to write! But I must leave you to go and see Georges'
cane at Froment-Meurice's, and execute your sovereign orders.

So you have seen Heidelberg! Thank you for the view and the branch of
box. But why did you not tell me what name Dr. Chelius gave to your
illness, and for what reason he sends you to Baden, the waters of
which always seem to me a farce? However, I am far from murmuring at
a decision which puts you on the frontier of France; thirty-six hours
from Paris. Only, I do want details as to your health. Anna's jewels
have been sent by a courier of the Rothschilds, directed to Baron
Anselme Rothschild at Frankfort. Write for them there and have them
sent wherever you are. You did not tell me how you passed the Prussian
frontier. You are very sure, are you not, that all your heart-griefs
are mine? I cannot get accustomed to life here now, I never cross the
Place de la Concorde without sighing heavily. When you are at Baden,
try to form the good habit of writing to me twice a week. You, so kind,
you will not refuse me that, will you? and you will not think me too
exacting, too tiresome, too importunate? Selfish, yes, I am that; but
your letters are my life.

I have not yet sold anything to the newspapers; I have had many
parleys, but no money; they think my price too high.

I have many annoyances about which I tell you nothing in my letters.
Alas! you have enough of your own; and besides, they would take up
too much space. I will relate them to you twenty-five days hence, to
be consoled as you alone know how to console. You will be frightened
at the blackness of the world, its injustices, its persecutions, its
hatreds. One might truly believe that there were none good in the
world but us two; at least to one another. Therefore, I no longer
want to live in Paris; I would much prefer living at Passy, seeing no
one, working under your eyes and never leaving you. There is nothing
true, believe me, but the one sentiment that rules me, especially when
doubled by the friendship which unites us: same tastes, same mind,
same efforts, same fraternal souls. I will put in for you here a
morning-glory out of my garden, and a bit of mignonette, gathered in
that path where we walked together so often; and I send you also the
little bit of lead type which was lost and has now been found. These
little things will come to you full of earnest wishes for your dear
health. Take good care of yourself; be selfish; that will be loving
your child, that will be proving once more that you do have some regard
for your faithful and devoted believer. Tell me what Dr. Chelius said
to you. Be very prudent at Baden; it is full of Frenchmen, gamblers,
journalists. Avoid the company there, see no one, for this fatal
celebrity of mine, which I curse, might cling to you who would abhor
it, sweet and simple violet that you are, and cause you much annoyance
and even, though God forbid it, grief.

All true flowers of affection, a thousand thoughts (unpublished ones,
if you please) to the great lady, the young girl, the stern critic, to
my indulgent public, to all that world that is contained in you, to all
those personages who are so many aspects of my sovereign so faithfully
and solely cherished.



PARIS, October 15, 1845.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Dresden.]

Dear countess; I leave Paris by the mail coach on the 22nd, just as you
are starting from Mulhausen, and I shall be at Chalon at five o'clock
on the 25th, just in time to give you a hand on getting out of your
carriage. My place is booked and paid for. How do you expect me to
write you from Paris _Wednesday_ a letter to Frankfort-on-the-Main,
when you leave that town on Thursday? I received your third letter
yesterday at Passy, in which you give me these directions, impossible
to follow. I groan the more as I cannot send you a letter for the
custom-house at Strasburg, where I wanted to recommend you to
attention.

Tell your social fortune-teller that her cards have lied; that I am
not preoccupied with any blonde, except Dame Fortune. No, I have no
words except the mute language of the heart wherewith to thank you for
that adorable letter No. 2, in which your gaiety breaks out with its
sparkling gush, sweet treasure of a charming wit which the fine weather
has brought back to you; for, as you once said to me, "It is only
wrong-doers who stay sad when the joyful sun shines."

I make use of the excellent M. Silbermann, who will take to you these
lines, not so much to tell you that you will find me at Chalon (your
instinct will have told you that), but to paint to you my delight on
reading your letter. Your infantine and purely physical joy enters my
heart; I admire that adorable nature, so playful, so spontaneous, and
so serious withal, because it is composed of lively impressions and
deep sentiments. My eyes were filled with tears in thanking God with
fervour that he had restored that health which you value for the sake
of others,--those who love you, like your children and your old and
faithful serf. Every time I go to breathe your atmosphere, your heart,
your presence, I come back desperate at the obstacles that prevent
me from staying in that heaven. I work, God knows how, for God alone
knows why. When you hold this letter I shall probably have no debts
whatever, except to my family. We will talk of my affairs on the boat
between Chalon and Lyon. I shall have much to tell you thereupon, and I
hope this time you will not be discontented with your servant. I have
enormously much to do, write, correct, in order to meet you. I hope
to take you as far as Genoa. But to whom could I confide the care of
holding your head if you are sea-sick? If you will let me do as I wish
I will go to Naples. I would give up everything, even fortune, to guard
a friend like you and care for her in case of illness. I cannot think
of you given over to strangers, to indifferent persons. I want to be
with you, dear countess, my brilliant star, my happiness!

All this week I have been like a balloon; you know what my tramps
on business errands are in Paris; I have been really overwhelmed by
them. Minutes are worth hours to me if I do not want to lose money by
travelling, for I must myself collect the sums due me. Also Les Jardies
will be paid for this week; and I have been five times to see Gavault
without finding him. You see I tell you all; it is stupid to talk of
these things here when we shall have a whole day on the boat from
Chalon to Lyon, and another from Lyon to Avignon. I will try to have
lodgings prepared for you in advance, as on our other journeys, for I
think you will be obliged to stop sometimes to rest.

I have not received the cup. I don't know whether the post takes charge
of such things. In any case, however, it cannot be lost. You know I
want to make a symbolic souvenir of it. It is to be supported by four
figures: Constancy, Labour, Friendship, Victory.

Baden was to me a bouquet of flowers without a thorn. We lived there
so sweetly, so peacefully, so heart to heart! I have never been as
happy in my life; I seemed to catch a glimpse of that future I call
to, I dream of, amid my troubles and my crushing labour. I would go
to the end of the world on foot to tell you that your letters are to
me in absence what you were yourself in Baden,--a masterpiece of the
heart which is not met with twice in life. Oh! if you knew how you are
blessed and invoked at every moment. My eyes are filled with happy
tears as I think of all you are to me; those are thoughts I dwell
on with a sweetness of recollection that nothing equals; that is my
excess; I allow myself that, as your dainty daughter allows herself
peaches.

I leave you; I have five folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE to correct. I
will write you to-morrow before beginning work. You can tell yourself
that in spite of toil, errands, business of all kinds and at all hours,
I am thinking of you; that your name is on my lips, in my head, in my
heart, and that I only live and breathe in you. You can add that I am
saying and repeating to myself incessantly: "On the 24th I shall see
her! I shall live ten days of her life!"


October 16.

Dear countess, I am working much; I wrote you in such haste yesterday
that I had no time to read over what I had written. I shall see you
perhaps this day week.

With the enticing prospect of that blessed 24th it is impossible for me
to put two ideas together; on the other hand, I have the sad certainty
of being unable to do fine literary work so long as I cannot see
daylight in my business affairs and have not paid integrally all my
creditors. Worried on that side, and absorbed on the other by a deep,
exclusive, passionately controlling sentiment, I can do nothing--the
mind is no longer here. This is not a complaint, nor a compliment,
it is truth. I have just come to a decision which will obviate this
misfortune; it is to end the twelfth volume of the COMÉDIE HUMAINE with
"Madame de la Chanterie." That relieves me from making seven folios
(which would have brought in nine thousand francs). Far from you I
am only happy when I am seeing you in thought and memory, when I am
thinking of you; and I think of you too much _for copy_.

I have received the pretty cup, and I want to make a marvel of it.
When you hold this letter, tell yourself that we are each going toward
the other. Take care in every way. Attend to your health; it is the
property of your child--I dare not say mine, and yet, what have I else
in this world? If anything in what I say displeases you, excuse it by
the haste in which I scribble. I have only time to close my letter by
saying, _à bientôt_.



MARSEILLE, November 12, 1845.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, Naples. Balzac had joined her at Chalon
and accompanied her, with her daughter and Count Mniszech (whom Anna
was now engaged to marry), to Naples. This letter was written on his
way back to Paris.--TR.]

I have this instant arrived, without my luggage or my passport; I have
not breakfasted; but while they are laying the table, I sit down to
write to you, dear countess, as usual; for it is, on arriving, my first
and greatest need.

It has _blown_ ever since I left Naples, "blown a gale" as they said
on the boat, with "a heavy sea." Those, as you know, are the innocent
words with which sailors disguise the most frightful weather. Ours
was so bad that we were obliged to put into Toulon yesterday, but
_La Santé_ [health officers] would not allow the purser of the ship,
or your humble diplomatic servant to land with the most important
despatches the East ever forwarded. It was seven o'clock; the sun
was down; _La Santé_ vacated its office. We told _La Santé_ that it
took upon its own head the greatest responsibility and was terribly
high-handed. _La Santé_ laughed in our faces, and we were forced to
spend the night on board and come on to Marseille. I was not sea-sick,
but everybody else, sailors excepted, was badly so. That was not all;
it rained in torrents the whole way. The yellow waters of the Tiber and
the Arno could be seen in the sea to a great distance; the littoral was
flooded. To all my griefs no aggravation was lacking. But I had one
diversion. I went to Pisa, and in spite of the beating rain I saw all;
except your admirer, M. C. The cathedral and the baptistery enchanted
me; but that enchantment was mingled with the thought that during this
year I had admired nothing without you until now; and I looked at those
noble things with deep melancholy.

At Civita Vecchia I landed, in memory of you, and went to see that
antiquity-shop, where you sat down. I there learned that Madame Bocarmé
had been telling tales about my journey; of no importance, however,
for who cares about the gossip of that intriguing old lady! You were
very right; I repent having written your name for Anna, as I always
repent when I have had the misfortune not to obey you in matters you
have thoroughly divined. Such is the exact tale of my journey. As for
sentiments, I shall have to invent new words, so weary must you be with
my elegies. I looked at the Hôtel des Victoires as long as I could.
Not a woman appeared on deck; they were only manifested by dreadful
vomitings, which rattled the panels of the ship as much as the fury of
the seas.

Here comes my breakfast to interrupt me.


Midnight.

Méry has just left me. I offered him tea and whist at ten sous a
fish; not ruinous, as you see. Here is the history of my day. After
breakfast I went to bed, for I was tired. Méry, to whom I had written
a line, came while I was asleep, and found me in such a magnificent
attitude of repose that he respected it. But he returned while I was
dressing, and we went to the shop of a dealer in antiquities, where I
found some very beautiful things. I chose a few trifles which seemed
to me true bargains to snatch; you know I never buy in any other way.
After leaving these shops we went to dinner,[1] and then returned here
for tea. I have lost five francs and won the collaboration of Méry
for several plays that I have in view. He is going to have the affair
of the two _savants_ copied, and we will have it printed for you. A
curious autograph of Méry's and some verses he has charged me to send
you are herewith inclosed. That will give you pleasure, will it not?

I leave to-morrow at eleven o'clock; so that I shall have stayed
only-forty-eight hours at Marseille, where I have been much occupied by
bric-à-brac, and somewhat by Méry. I must close this letter and send
it, for the mail goes to-morrow to Italy.

[Footnote 1: See Memoir, p. 272--TR.]


November 13, nine in the morning.

Adieu again, dear countess; I shall not write you more until I reach
Passy. You know well what is in my heart and soul and memory for you
and your two children--for Georges is like a first-born to you. I am
still stupid from the sea-voyage, even in writing to you; the roll of
the vessel is in my head; you will excuse me, will you not? I wrote you
with my feet still wet with sea-water. To-morrow I take the mail-cart
for Paris. I have spent a great deal, apart from my purchases. In the
first place, on the ship the water was not drinkable; I had to have
champagne, and I could not drink it alone beside the captain and the
purser, who had been admirably attentive to me. All that was much
extra. Then I had to ask some gentlemen to breakfast this morning at
the Hôtel de l'Orient; politeness required it; besides, that is part
of my make-up as author of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE. Don't cry out at the
extravagance; and say nothing about it to Georges, who would take me
for a Lucullus and laugh at me.

Affectionate homage, and all tenderness of heart to your adorable
child, and to the excellent Georges. I am going to work to rejoin
you. Perhaps you will see Méry in Florence; he has arranged to make
the journey with me. Take good care of yourself, and tell yourself
sometimes that there is a poor being at Passy very far from his sun.
I am like Méry,--very chilly when in Paris. You are my Provence. Méry
talked much of you to me; you are very sympathetic to him. He took
full notice of your Olympian brow, which has something of a Pagan
god and the Christian angel and a little of the demon (I mean the
demon of knowledge). Those who know you as I do can aspire to but one
thing beside you; and that is to comprehend, enjoy, and love your soul
more and more, if only to become better by intercourse with you and
your etherealized spirit. That is my prayer, the desire of my human
religion, and my last yearning thought towards you.



PARIS, November 18, 1845.

Dear countess, I arrived here so fatigued that I was forced to go to
bed, and have only just risen for dinner, and shall return to bed
directly after it. I have a severe lumbago and fever; I feel all
kneaded and broken. I went beyond my strength. At Marseille I was
perpetually in company, and that added greatly to the effects of the
voyage. You saw the life I led in Naples,--always going, rushing,
looking, examining, observing, and talking! So that these last three
nights in the mail-cart, without sleep, added to twelve days on
shipboard and rushing about Naples, have vanquished my health, vigorous
as it is. I went out this morning to the custom-house and to see Émile
de Girardin, and this evening to see M. F... I am not yet recovered; I
still have lumbago and fever, but a good night's sleep will cure me.


November 19.

Georges' commissions will be handed to him about December 15 by the
captain of the "Tancrède." His cane is ordered and will soon be
finished. My affairs are doing well; but I shall not finish everything
by the end of the year; and as long as I have a single creditor, it
would be imprudent to raise the mask by becoming a property-owner.

Chlendowski gives me the greatest uneasiness. He threatens to go into
bankruptcy if he is not aided. I never knew a man lie like him. What
you did for love of France with Laurent-Jan, I have done for Poland
with Chlendowski. Fate tells us, dear countess, to take care of none
but ourselves. Honest folk, believe me, have enough to do in that way
without undertaking the care of others. If Chlendowski fails, I shall
lose ten thousand francs; the thought makes me shudder.

I have given orders to search Paris for a house all built and ready;
for it is impossible, in view of the scarcity of money, that a fine
house could not be had for a hundred and fifty thousand francs.


November 21.

I rose at nine o'clock, a lump of lead! I am making up my arrears of
sleep. Alas! my good genius will hear with pain that I am forced to
set myself an Herculean task. I must put my papers in order, and it is
now ten years since I have touched them. What labour! I have to make a
bundle for each creditor, with bill and receipt in perfect order, under
pain of paying twice for what was never due. It will give me a fever
till it is all done. But I am in such haste to return to Italy and
to my dear troupe, never to leave them again, that I find courage to
drive all my affairs abreast,--manuscripts, completions of everything,
publishers, debts, even the purchase of a property worthy of the author
of LA G-R-R-R-ANDE COMÉDIE HUMAINE.

I must bid you abruptly adieu, and hurry out on business, so as to
be able to-morrow to return to regular hours of rising and working.
I intend to rise at four every day. Adieu, then, dear, distant star,
which scintillates forever, ceaselessly, as memory and as consolation.


November 25.

Yesterday I rushed the whole day; twenty-five francs carriage hire!
I went to see my sister; then to Girardin at the "Presse," where my
account is settled. Girardin takes "Les Petites Misères," and I must
now finish them. Then I went to Plon's printing-office. I saw A. de
B... about the renewal of Chlendowski's notes; and I am now expecting
the said Chlendowski to explain his position to me. After which, I must
go out again and see M. Gavault to regulate his account, and know what
he has paid. All that is not proof of activity; it is simply becoming
the wheel of a machine.

Chlendowski came. I spoke to him sternly and with dignity. I told
him that in order to help a man who had summoned me, I must have
guarantees; I must have a deed legally drawn, and a deposit of the
wood-cuts which are to illustrate "Les Petites Misères;" and on that
condition I was willing to renew his notes for three thousand eight
hundred francs. The man took my arm, in the Polish fashion, and kissed
it humbly. In this way I shall be secured if he fails, and A. de B...
consents to keep the wood-cuts. See what difficulties and worries! We
have an appointment for to-morrow, and I must now go to M. Gavault and
consult on this deed of guaranty. I dine with Émile de Girardin, who
wants to know if "Les Petites Misères" is _publishable_.


November 27.

I have no news of my purchases at Amsterdam. But, on the other hand,
I found on my return a letter from a ship-owner in Havre, asking for
an interview. I wrote to M. Periollas, asking him to inquire about my
cases, and also about the ship-owner. I have just received his answer;
he says he knows nothing about the cases, but that the ship-owner is
building a ship which he wants to call "Le Balzac;" and Periollas asks
me to write a pretty letter to the ship-owner because he adores me. So,
dear countess, your servitor will be carved on the prow of a vessel and
show his fat face to all the nations; what do you say to that?

I have just heard strange, sad news,--Harel is mad, and Karr also. I
prefer not to believe it.


November 28.

I have received a letter from Lirette inviting me to the ceremony of
her taking the vows and veil. This letter has prevented me from sending
my packet to you by the boat of December 1, for I want you to know of
this at once; but it really hurts me to think what anxiety the delay
may cause you.

I assure you that my life here is no longer endurable. I live in
a whirlwind of errands, business, consultations, legal notices,
corrections, which deprive me of all reflection, pressed as I am on all
sides, with not a soul to help me, doing all myself. Yesterday I worked
seven hours on "Les Petites Misères" ... Is it written above that,
until the end, I shall be harried and driven like a college drudge?



PASSY, December 3, 1845.

I could not write to you yesterday; I had very pressing proofs for the
"Presse" (which wants the whole of "Les Petites Misères" at once), and
also for LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE. So that having risen at half-past two in
the morning, I worked till midday. I had scarcely time to breakfast and
reach the convent at one o'clock.

These good sisters really think that the world turns for them alone.
I asked the portress how long the ceremony would last; she replied,
"An hour." So I thought to myself: I can see Lirette after it and get
back in time for my business at the printing-office. Well, it lasted
till four o'clock! Then I had, in decency, to see the poor girl; and
I did not get away till half-past five. But I don't blame Lirette; it
was right that her dear countess and her Anna should be represented
at the burial of their friend; so I went through it bravely. I had a
fine place beside the officiating priest. The sermon lasted nearly
an hour; it was well-written and well-delivered; not strong, but full
of faith. The officiating priest went to sleep (he was an old man).
Lirette never stirred. She was on her knees between two postulants.
The little girls were ranged on one side of the choir, the Chapter
on the other, behind the grating, which was made transparent for the
occasion. Lirette, together with the postulants, listened to the
exhortation-sermon on her knees and did not raise her eyes. Her face
was white, pure, and stamped with the enthusiasm of a saint. As I had
never seen the ceremony of taking the veil, I watched, observed, and
studied everything with a deep attention which made them take me, I
have no doubt, for a very pious man. On arriving, I prayed for you and
for your children fervently; for each time that I see an altar I take
my flight to God and humbly and ardently dare to ask his goodness for
me and mine--who are you and yours. The chapel, with its white and gold
altar, was a very pretty one; it belongs to the Order of the Visitation
of Gresset. The ceremony was imposing and very dramatic. I felt deeply
moved when the three new sisters threw themselves on the ground, and
were buried beneath a mortuary pall while prayers for the dead were
recited over those living creatures, and when, after that, we saw them
rise and appear as brides, crowned with white roses, to make their vows
of espousal to Jesus Christ.

An incident occurred. The youngest of the sisters, pretty as a dream
of love, was so agitated that when it came to pronouncing the vows
she was forced to stop short, precisely at the vow of chastity. It
lasted thirty seconds at most; but it was awful; there seemed to be
uncertainty. For my part, I admit that I was shaken to the depths of my
soul; the emotion I felt was too great for an unknown cause. The poor
little thing soon came to herself, and the ceremony went on without
further hindrance.

When one has seen the taking of the veil in France, one feels a pity
for writers who talk of forced vows. Nothing can be more free. If a
young girl were constrained what prevents her from stopping everything?
The world is there as spectator, and the officiating priest asks
twice if she has fully reflected on the vows she desires to take. I
saw Lirette after the ceremony; she was gay as a lark. "You are now
Madame," I said, laughing. She replied she was so happy she asked
God continually to make us all priests and nuns! We ended by talking
seriously of you and your dear child.

Dear countess, I hope you will find here a proof of my affection, for
I was overwhelmed with work and business. But Lirette had written,
"I am sure that nothing will prevent you from being present." I knew
too well the meaning she attached to that not to determine it should
be fulfilled. I was happy there, for I thought exclusively of you,
after I had made my prayers. To think of you who are my religion and
my life, is to think of God. I feel but too well that if your glorious
friendship failed me I should lose consciousness of myself, I should
become insane, or die.

December 4, 1845.

To-morrow I am going to see, in the rue des Petits-Hôtels, Place
Lafayette (you know), a little house that is there for sale. It is
close beside that church of Saint-Vincent-de-Paul, the Byzantine church
we went to see, and where a funeral was going on. You said, looking
at the vacant ground near the church which I pointed out to you: "I
should not be unwilling to live here; we should be near God, and far
from the world." From what I am told I think I could buy the house and
might even do so without consulting you; it would be firing on the fly
at a pheasant. My next letter will tell you if it is done. The rue
des Petits-Hôtels joins the rue d'Hauteville (which goes down to the
boulevard near the Gymnase), and, by the rue Montholon, it intersects
the rue Saint-Lazare and the rue de la Pépinière. It is in the centre
of that part of Paris which is called the right bank, and will always
be the region of the boulevards and theatres. It is also the upper
banking quarter.

My letter must go to-morrow if I want the "Tancrède" to take it. "Les
Petites Misères de la Vie conjugale" is finished. To-morrow I begin the
last folio (sixteen pages) that remains to do on LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE;
then all will have been delivered to Chlendowski. I expect to finish
the novel for Souverain by the 20th or 25th of December. Then I need
three months for the seven volumes of "Les Paysans;" that will bring
me to March 15. My mother's affairs will take some time, as well as
the clearing up of my liquidation accounts. I do wish, you see, not to
leave any business behind me in quitting Paris for perhaps eighteen
months; and when I return it must be to my own home. I have promised
you that, and I will no longer deceive myself by thinking that I can do
the impossible.

T see with grief that I shall, apparently, have to sacrifice Florence
and Rome to the work and the business that will secure, as you say, the
repose and safely of my future. To spend immense sums in going to see
you for only eight days, and returning to find suits and worries of
all kinds is senseless! I must have, as you say, the courage to spare
myself these mistaken calculations and these bootless sorrows. I shall
try to go to Rome for Holy Week, for I shall then be so weary I shall
need some distraction; but if by sacrificing that happiness I should
obtain your _satisfecit_ and what you call a "position worthy of me,"
I should not hesitate. Will you, at last, approve of me a little? Tell
me so, then, for I have great need of being sustained by you in my
hard and cruel resolutions. Don't you see, nothing is ever done in the
time I assign for things. If LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE is not finished by
December 25, I cannot have the money for it before January 15, 1846,
and if I do not get it till then, my payments are delayed that time.
So with "Les Paysans;" I shall not be paid till March. Money rules me
absolutely when it is a question of paying creditors. Well, between now
and a month hence all will be done. But if you only knew the steps,
the tramps! Creditors for three hundred francs cost as much search and
verification as those for thirty thousand--it is a labyrinth, a hydra!

Adieu, dear distant star, yet always present; soft and celestial light,
without which all would be darkness within me and without me. Oh! I
entreat you, take care of yourself. I am not too anxious about your
little illness; it is only an effect of the climate; they told me that
on the ship, and strong constitutions are often the most tried. But I
tell you and I repeat it to you: take care of yourself. Remember that
you are the glory and honour and sole treasure of a poor being who
loves you exclusively, who thinks of you only, whose acts, as well
as his thoughts and dreams, are emanations from that moral sun of
affection which is his whole soul in its relation to you. Bless you a
thousand times for your punctuality in writing! Tell me everything;
all that happens to you, with every possible detail; nothing is
insignificant to me if it concerns you. Do as I do. Among all the great
worries of my life, as troubled as yours is calm and serene, I do not a
pass a day without writing you a line, as a merchant makes up his day
book. Well, a few more efforts, and a little patience, and I hope to
have conquered the right to never leave you again.



PASSY, December 13, 1845.

Dear countess; I am overcome by the same nostalgia which I felt before
I went to Chalon. It is excessively difficult for me to write; my
thought is not free; it no longer belongs to me. I believe that I
cannot recover my faculties under eighteen months, perhaps. You must
resign yourself to endure me beside you. Since Dresden I have done no
great thing. The beginning of "Les Paysans" and the end of "Béatrix"
were my last efforts; since then, nothing has been possible to me.
Yesterday, during the whole day, I felt a sombre and dreadful gloom
within me.

Yet I must finish the six folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE. Furne has
come. He has excellent intentions. On my side, I _must_ complete this
undertaking, which is all my future. But the heart is as absolute as
the brain, it is indifferent to whatever is not itself; millions to
win, a fortune of fame and self-love satisfied is nothing to the heart.

Your letter describes to me a similar state with much truth and
eloquence. That letter, in which pain is more contagious than the
plague, and over which I wept your tears, shuddering to find there what
I felt myself, that letter has filled the measure of my inward and
hidden malady. Nothing but my interests can drag me out of the deep
despondency that has now laid hold upon me. Paris is a dreadful desert;
nothing gives me pleasure, nothing contents me; I am under the empire
of some passionate invading force without analogy in my life. I compare
the twenty-four towns we saw together with one another; I try to recall
your observations, your ideas, your advice; motion fatigues me, rest
depresses me. I get up, I walk, but my body is absent, I see it, I feel
it; at times, as I tell you, this is madness. It is very probable that
if my six folios of LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE were finished I could go to
Naples; and that thought is the only means of making me do them. What
could I not obtain from myself under the hope of that immense joy, were
it only for one week? I tell myself there are a thousand reasons why I
ought to see you, consult you; that I can do nothing without you. In
short my mind is the accomplice of my heart and will.

Meantime, awaiting the result, I make no complaint, I am dull and
gloomy; I am like a Breton conscript, regretting his dear scones and
his Bretagne. All that is not you was once without interest to me, now
it is odious.


December 14.

Yesterday, dear countess, I went to see, in detail, the Conciergerie,
and I saw the queen's dungeon and that of Madame Elisabeth. It is all
dreadful. I saw everything thoroughly; it took the whole morning, and
I had no time to go to the rue Dauphine to do Georges' commissions.
When I went back towards the court of assizes I heard that the trial
then going on was that of Madame Colomès, niece of Maréchal Sebastiani,
a woman forty-five years of age whom I wished to see. And I found,
seated on the prisoner's bench of the court of assizes, the living
image of Madame de Berny! It was awful. She was madly in love with a
young man, and to give him money, which he spent on actresses of the
Porte-Saint-Martin, she forged indorsements in negotiating the notes
of imaginary persons. She took everything on herself (he has taken to
flight), and would not allow her lawyer to charge the blame to him.

I had never heard a case pleaded in court and I stayed to hear
Crémieux, who spoke well, _ma foi_! The unhappy creature, in order to
get money to give the young man, had abandoned herself to usurers, to
old men! Crémieux told me that she said to her lover: "I only ask you
to deceive me enough to let me fancy I am loved." She is the daughter
of a brother of the maréchal, and the wife of the engineer-in-chief
of Bridges and Highways, and a deputy. I was so deeply interested in
finding a novel seated on that bench, that I stayed till half-past four
o'clock beside the poor creature, who has been very handsome and who
wept like a Magdalen; every now and then I heard her sigh out, "Aie!
aie! aie!" in three heart-rending tones.

M. Lebel, governor of the Conciergerie, who has locked the door on
every sort of crime for the last fifteen years, is, they tell me,
the grandson of the Lebel who opened the doors of Louis XV. to the
beauties of the Parc-aux-cerfs. These vicissitudes, these striking
analogies, occur in obscure families as in the most august. The heir
of the original Lebel, the successor of him of royal pomps, had
nothing to leave on going to his death but a worn-out cravat and an
old prayer-book. When you come to Paris I must certainly show you the
Palais; it is curious and thrilling and completely unknown. Now I can
do my work ["La Dernière Incarnation de Vautrin"].

On my return home, I found I had missed Captier, Claret's friend. This
is a pity; I should have liked to talk with him about a purchase I
have in view. There is a chance of buying a bit of ground in the rue
Jean-Goujon in the best condition. It is only a stone's throw from the
Place de la Concorde.

Yesterday I found some distraction of my nostalgic misery in the
Conciergerie, and the court of assizes, and to-day I plunge into work
vehemently.

Ah! I must have my house between two gardens, without disagreeable
neighbourhood. And I will have a little greenhouse at the back of
it--But I must leave you, I must work. You do not know that I am
silently collecting very splendid art furniture by dint of researches
and tramps about Paris, economy, and privations. I don't wish to speak
to you of this; I shall not unmask my batteries until my dream takes,
more and more, the semblance of reality.


December 15.

I am now launched into work. This night I have done six pages of the
six folios I have to do; and I assure you--I, who know myself--that
that is a great deal. I shall try this week to finish LA COMÉDIE
HUMAINE.

Yesterday, after finishing my work, I went to see my sister, on a
letter she had written me saying that her eldest daughter was dying.
Sophie had really nothing more than a slight congestion of the head,
which cooling drinks relieved. I heard from Laure that a M. Bleuart
was on the point of ruin from having bought up the _quartier_ Beaujon,
and that several of the houses were for sale. I hurried there. There
are, indeed, houses and vacant ground; but of all those houses there is
but one that is anything like finished, and that one is immense; nine
windows on the front. I am going there on Wednesday with a friend of
Claret and a young man who is in the secret of M. Bleuart's affairs.
You see I bestir myself to find a really good thing, and repair in some
degree the disaster of Les Jardies; but the important thing of all is
to work. I met my old landlord of the rue des Batailles, and he told me
that ground in the rue Jean-Goujon was selling for nothing, and I ought
to make haste to buy at present prices.

On returning from Beaujon yesterday, I went to pay a visit of half an
hour to Madame de Girardin. Returning at six o'clock, I dined and was
asleep by seven. In examining my resources, I think I can do without
what you know of (the Dresden affair); it is, I have reflected,
so difficult to write, receive, and send papers of that kind that
I shall try to wait, and place the matter as a last result in its
time and place. I am so in the habit when I write to you of thinking
aloud, calculating, and recalculating, that you see and know all my
hesitations, my backings-down, my additions, etc. You are always and in
all things my sole thought; it is you, and you know it well, who are
the foundation of everything. If I had the strength this night to apply
myself to six folios it was because I want to go from Naples to Rome
with you, and for that I shall try to leave here January 11. I want to
install you in Rome, as I installed you in Naples. Madame de Girardin
calls me _il vetturino per amore_.

Adieu for to-day. How are you? Do you amuse yourself sometimes? Does
Georges take good care of both of you? If anything happens to you under
his auspices I will crush his box of insects on the boat. I bless you
every day of my life, and I thank God for your good affection. You
are my happiness, as you are my fame and my future. Do you sometimes
remember that morning at Valence on the bank of the Rhône, when our
gentle talk triumphed over your neuralgia as we walked for two hours
in the dawn, both ill, yet without perceiving the cold or our own
sufferings? Believe me, such memories, which are wholly of the soul,
are as powerful as the material recollections of others; for in you the
soul is more beautiful than the corporeal beauties for which the sons
of Adam destroy themselves.

Adieu till to-morrow, gentle and spiritual power, who hold subjected to
your laws your poor and fervent servitor.


December 16.

I received yesterday at four o'clock your number 4. I see that you
are still uneasy; but you have not thought of one thing, which is
that you began to write to me while I was travelling, and it requires
time to establish our regular correspondence. Thus to-day, December
16, I have received four letters from you; well, you, between now and
December 30, will have received four letters from me. What is the
difference?--fourteen days. But those fourteen days were five at sea,
three at Marseille, three in a mail-cart, and the first week in Paris,
during which I wrote to you from here. I calculate that you have to-day
received my packet by the "Tancrède." That was my number 2; on the
24th you will get my number 3, sent by Anselme de Rothschild; and this
will reach you on the 30th, because it will leave here on the 21st.
So, dear countess, in spite of the uneasiness which this early failure
of the superior force has caused you, you see I am not in fault; I have
written to you every day,--too much, in fact, for I have done nothing
but think of you, and I have written too little for _posterity_; and
not to write retards my liberation.

_Mon Dieu_, how your letters make me live! I have an idolatry for those
dear papers; I am like a child about them; your punctuality delights
me. Never think that I mistake the value of such goodness on your part.
I entreat you, take care of yourself; those pains in your stomach worry
me. Mine have disappeared, or at least I seldom suffer from them. What
is deplorable is that work fatigues me, the symptoms that happiness and
the journeys of this year drove away are returning. My eyes throb, the
temples also, and I feel weary. I have had to buy a candelabrum for
five candles; three were no longer enough, my eyes pained me. So that
ugly little candlestick of tarnished gilt, which you must have noticed
in my study, is now replaced by a ministerial candelabrum of unheard-of
magnificence in bronze, chased and gilt; but it burns one franc fifty
centimes' worth of wax-candles every night; do you hear that, madame?
Now, two francs for fire, and fifty centimes of coffee besides, make
four francs a night. The Arabian Nights cost dear.

Dear countess, I can give Lirette her capital without any difficulty.
Tell me how much you intend for her, and I will pay it to her at once.
I will go to the convent and settle it with her. I shall be quite
content to receive it back in May. Why give yourself the trouble of
sending money here. Let me be, for once at least, your business agent.

I have not yet obtained your fantastic set of jewels; but I shall have
them soon. Froment-Meurice desires to distinguish himself on Georges'
cane, and I don't know whether it will be done by New Year's day. He
is a great artist. I assure you it is quite alarming to see how much
talent and genius there are in Paris.

I am so cautious about all that concerns you that I shall not risk
sending this letter on the 17th; for the boat leaves on the 21st, and
at this season the mail-cart might be delayed; therefore I prefer to
put my letter in the post to-day, 16th. So I cannot tell you anything
about the Bleuart houses; but you shall know all by the letter leaving
January 1; you will know also whether I can take the steamboat that
starts on the 11th. Do not insist, I entreat you, on forbidding it.
In the first place I warn you that, not only you will not be listened
to, but I shall be very happy in disobeying you. That means nothing,
however, for the greatest happiness must always consist, for me, in the
most complete submission to your sovereign will, ever and everywhere.
But, I repeat, you alone will be responsible if you persist.

I still have no news of my purchases at Amsterdam; those are furniture
griefs. I have just heard of a great misfortune; the beautiful Madame
Delaroche, daughter of Horace Vernet, is dead.

Well, _à bientôt_. Consent with a good grace, because you will gain
nothing by refusing. Do you not think it may be the food at the Hotel
Vittoria which gives you those pains in your stomach?



PASSY, December 17, 1845.[1]

[Footnote 1: To Madame Hanska, at Naples.]

Dear countess; my ability to work only lasted two days. I am again
seized by _spleen_, complicated with nostalgia, or, if you like, by an
ennui I never felt before. Yes, this is _true ennui_; nothing amuses
me, nothing distracts me, nothing enlivens me; it is a death of the
soul, a death of the will, the collapse of the whole being. I feel that
I cannot take up my work until I see my life decided, fixed, settled.
LA COMÉDIE HUMAINE--I no longer care for it; I will let Chlendowski sue
me for the folios that are lacking; I cannot think for the six that
are to finish the sixteen volumes. More than that, to-morrow I was to
go and see a house of which they tell me marvels; and that scarcely
interests me. I am exhausted. I have waited too long; I have hoped too
much; I have been too happy this last year; and I can wish no longer.
To have been, after so many years of toil and misfortune, free as a
bird of the air, a thoughtless traveller, superhumanly happy, and then
to come back to a dungeon! Is that possible? I dream, I dream by day,
by night; and my heart's thought, returning upon itself, prevents
all action of the brain thought--it is fearful! I have sent for "Les
Mystères de Londres," which you told me had amused you; I will read it
to escape myself.


December 18.

Yesterday I read "Les Mystères de Londres" from two o'clock in the
afternoon till midnight; I read the book through. It is a little better
than Sue or Dumas; but not good; it made me feverish.

This morning Captier came for me; and I have returned with a bad cold
from the Beaujon _quartier_. It was raining in torrents; we stood with
our feet in the mud and our shoulders wet for three hours, and I was
seized with a sore throat which has almost extinguished my voice. The
house we went to see is held at two hundred thousand francs and we
offered eighty thousand. It is large and handsome; with nine windows
front, two storeys, a magnificent ground-floor, and ill-arranged first
floor which would have to be entirely remodelled. There would be twenty
thousand francs, at least, to spend upon it. Besides which, it has an
insolent air; it looks like a great restaurant, and the sacrifices
made to the outside are immense inconveniences; for instance, you
enter it from a portico which would require a vast awning over it.
Another thing: the land in the rue Jean-Goujon is impossible; they ask
twenty-five thousand francs for it. There is no ground in Paris for a
hundred francs the metre; and there are nearly four metres in a fathom.
You can judge if the Monceau land is a good bargain. I shall keep where
I am, and not hasten anything; I think that is wisest.


December 20.

A terrible misfortune has happened. The Doubs has overflowed: the water
is higher than in any former flood; the bridge my brother-in-law was
building has been swept away. I am now going to see my sister.--

I found at Laure's a very concise letter from the doctor of the
"Leonidas" telling me he had seen you in Naples. The letter only
reached me to-day and he says that he leaves on the 21st. He asks for
an answer, which I have sent in four words, but I do not know whether
he will receive it. My depression still continues. I am reading "Les
Trois Mousquetaires," and I suffer from my cold.

I found desolation at my sister's home; her daughter is ill; I stayed
there all day trying to brighten them up. Can you conceive that my
brother-in-law, having two bridges to build this year, should have
gone to Spain with M. de P..., a man who, as I suppose, is looking for
fortune on the hope of building a railroad in Spain. My sister owned
that it was she who induced her husband to make this journey; and the
luckless man writes to her that Spain has cost him dear, for if he had
himself superintended the building of the Doubs bridge it would have
been finished and delivered; in which case the disaster from natural
forces would have fallen on the government.

The contracts for the Chemin de fer du Nord are given out to-day; if
Rothschild awards them, the shares of that railway will certainly rise.

Adieu for to-day. I re-plunge into "Les Trois Mousquetaires," for life
without work is intolerable, and I continue to think of you with a
persistence that alarms me. I remain, stupid, in one place; and I don't
know what would happen to me if I flung myself into work desperately.
I have not a thought that is not for you; I have no will other than
to go where you are; I am, as it were, driven by that desire; and,
nailed to this spot by necessity, I remain motionless with grief.
It is impossible for me to forget; I pass whole hours with my eyes
fixed on that table-cloth embroidered by your dear little white-mouse
paws; in gazing at its squares, red, green, and its striped lines,
thinking of you, and recalling the infinitely trifling details of that
journey--No, instead of scolding me, have pity on me, for I am truly
too unhappy. I implore work, and it refuses me inspiration. I hope,
nevertheless, that this may not last always, and that one of these days
will see me seriously at my table for the service, if not the profit,
of his Majesty the Public.


December 21.

I have read "Les Trois Mousquetaires" and that was all I did yesterday.
I went to bed at seven o'clock, and I have now got up at four in the
morning. I am better in mind; I have a real desire to work; and that
desire seems to me of good augury. Besides, it _must_ be done; all
things urge me to it,--the money to earn, the obligations to fulfil,
liberty, and the possibility of seeing you the sooner. Can you imagine,
dear star of my life, that money says nothing to me now? No, truly,
it does not stir me. There is no longer in my soul any vestige of
ambition, any desire for fortune; porcelains, pictures, all those
things of luxury that I have loved, I am now indifferent to. Oh! what a
tyrant is a sentiment like mine! how all things disappear before it!

I can understand, dear countess, why you were shocked at "Les
Mousquetaires," you so well-informed, knowing, above all, the history
of France, not only from the historical point of view, but even to the
smallest details of the cabinet of the kings and the private dinners of
the queens. One is certainly sorry to have read this book, if only from
disgust with one's self for having wasted one's time,--the precious
stuff of which life is made. It is not so that we reach the last page
of a novel of Walter Scott; this is not the sentiment with which we
leave him; we re-read Scott, but I do not think we shall re-read Dumas.
He is a charming narrator; but he ought to renounce history, or else
study it, and know it better.

On opening my window on the street side this morning I had a giddiness,
and I still have the blood in my head. I shall take a foot bath
and it will pass away. Besides, if I work, the equilibrium will be
re-established, and I am going to work. Oh! if you only knew what
respect I feel for myself, knowing that a being so perfect, a woman so
accomplished takes interest in my existence. For a year past I have no
memory except for her; for two weeks now I think of nothing but of how
to return to her. I arrange the crumbs of my feast, I absorb myself in
the recollection of nothings which turn into poems.

Did you know that Schwab was in Paris? He came to see me this morning,
and--would you believe it?--I saw Schwab with delight, for Schwab
is the Hague. Do you remember a certain walk we took to the Chinese
bazaar, behind the children? No, never did two souls give themselves
to each other with more poesy, more charm! These recollections are to
me so many suns, shining on the Spitzberg; they make me live; I live
by them alone. There are things in the past (the past that is yours)
that give me the effect of a gigantic flower--which shall I say?--a
magnolia, moving, walking, one of those dreams of youth, too poetic,
too beautiful to be ever realized--

Forgive me! I have been sitting here stupefied; I have wept like a
child,--I am so unhappy to be at Passy when you are at Naples! I have
let myself go, I have let myself write to you in this letter that
which I dream at all hours, and in thought it is less dangerous than
formulated. In thought it is the gossamer thread athwart the azure;
here, upon this paper, it is an iron cable which wrings and presses me
till the blood gushes out in tears of despair.

Adieu for to-day; if I listened to myself I should write you till
to-morrow. I am beside myself with regret and pain; I implore my work
to keep me sane.


December 22.

I dined yesterday with Madame de Girardin, and heard excellent music
from Mademoiselle Delarue. She is the daughter of a worthy old man whom
you knew in Vienna. Gautier, who was there, made me promise to go and
take haschisch with him to-night at the Hôtel Pimodan. I must now go
out on all sorts of tiresome business.


December 23.

I resisted the haschisch; that is, I did not experience any of the
phenomena they talked of. My brain is so solid that it needed, perhaps,
a stronger dose. Nevertheless I did hear celestial voices and saw
divine pictures; after which I descended Lauzun's staircase during
twenty years. I saw gildings and paintings in a salon of fairy-like
splendour. But this morning, since waking, I am half asleep, and
without strength or will.[1]

[Footnote 1: Théophile Gautier has related this evening in his essay on
Baudelaire, in the "Portraits et Souvenirs littéraires."]


December 25.

Yesterday I slept the whole day, and to-morrow I am going to Rouen to
see some ebony panels which, I am told, can be had for nothing. This
morning M. Captier is coming for me to see some land in the rue du
Rocher. It is impossible to get that Dujarier legacy paid. I have lost
a whole day rushing about on that business and attained nothing. I
still cannot work.


December 27.

I started yesterday from Passy at six in the morning; at seven I was on
the railroad and at eleven I was at Rouen. It is the route I took with
you and Anna. Is not that telling you that I thought the whole way of
you two? I transported myself back in thought to that day when we saw
Rouen; it was a fête I gave myself. I was happy, oh! very happy! I saw
the treacherous confectioner, and I recalled my atrocious sufferings
when I thought myself poisoned between Rouen and Mantes. Ah! how kind
you were! then, as always, my guardian angel and beneficent star.

I found at Rouen the relics of a regal piece of furniture which I
bought for eighty francs. That is doing business! True, it will cost a
good deal to repair and arrange it; that frightens me, but I shall give
it to a cabinet-maker, and then my remorse will be complete.

Another result, not quite so satisfactory; as I had eaten nothing all
day, I came back with a dreadful headache.


December 28.

I have just returned from the post-office; no letters from Naples. I
begin to be very uneasy, for I ought to have one of the 18th, which
is the day the steamboat sailed; allowing six days for navigation
and three days from Marseille here, that is nine days. I have just
seen an advertisement of a house in the rue du Montparnasse; they ask
ninety thousand francs for it, with costs that would make it a hundred
thousand. I will go and see it; it is in the Luxembourg quarter.

I must bid you adieu; each time I close a letter and take it to the
post I seem to be going myself to meet you. Ah! _à propos_, do not let
us calumniate any one. The Duc de S... died from other causes than
those you think. It is a curious history, which I will tell you some
day. He was going to be married, and when he saw that his bride would
never be anything but his bride, less philosophical than Louis XVIII.,
he blew out his brains.

M. Captier has brought me the plan of a house; to cost from forty to
fifty thousand francs; with land costing fifty thousand, that would
be a hundred thousand; but I cling to the hope of finding a house all
complete for that money. I shall wait.

My incapacity for work makes me very unhappy. On Wednesday, the last
day of the year, I dine with Madame de Girardin, in order to take
measures with Nestor Roqueplan for the Variétés. I shall then begin to
work seriously at "Richard Cœur-d'Éponge." I tell you this that you
may know what I am doing or expect to do. You will receive this letter
on your first of January, which is our 6th, your anniversary. God grant
that in this coming year of 1846 we may never be parted for a moment;
that you will lay down the burden of your responsibilities, and will
have no others. Those are my ostensible prayers; there is another that
I keep for myself alone. I end this year loving you more than ever;
blessing you for all the immense consolations that I owe to you, which
even now are life to me. At moments I think myself ungrateful when
I recall this year of 1845, and I say to myself that I have only to
remember in order to be happy. What I have in my heart, that is my
haschisch! I need only retire there to be in heaven.

Dear star, luminous, yet ever, alas! so distant, above all never be
discouraged; hope, have faith in your fervent servitor; believe that
when you read these lines I shall again be working, sending off my
sheets of "copy," and that I shall soon be free to go to you; if,
indeed, you do not forbid it too rigorously. But no, you could not have
the courage, knowing me so unhappy, to refuse me the only consolation
that enables me to bear my life.
