Chapter II 1838.

HEAVEN ON EARTH

_Jan. 6._ As a child looks forward to the coming of the summer, so
could we contemplate with quiet joy the circle of the seasons returning
without fail eternally. As the spring came round during so many years
of the gods, we could go out to admire and adorn anew our Eden, and yet
never tire.


SAXONS

_Jan. 15._ After all that has been said in praise of the Saxon race, we
must allow that our blue-eyed and fair-haired ancestors were originally
an ungodly and reckless crew.


WE MAKE OUR OWN FORTUNE

_Jan. 16._ Man is like a cork which no tempest can sink, but it will
float securely to its haven at last. The world is never the less
beautiful though viewed through a chink or knot-hole.


_Jan. 21._ Man is the artificer of his own happiness. Let him beware
how he complains of the disposition of circumstances, for it is his own
disposition he blames. If this is sour, or that rough, or the other
steep, let him think if it be not his work. If his look curdles all
hearts, let him not complain of a sour reception; if he hobble in his
gait, let him not grumble at the roughness of the way; if he is weak
in the knees, let him not call the hill steep. This was the pith of the
inscription on the wall of the Swedish inn: "You will find at Trolhate
excellent bread, meat, and wine, provided you bring them with you!"[22]


HOAR FROST

Every leaf and twig was this morning covered with a sparkling ice
armor; even the grasses in exposed fields were hung with innumerable
diamond pendants, which jingled merrily when brushed by the foot of
the traveller. It was literally the wreck of jewels and the crash of
gems. It was as though some superincumbent stratum of the earth had been
removed in the night, exposing to light a bed of untarnished crystals.
The scene changed at every step, or as the head was inclined to the
right or the left. There were the opal and sapphire and emerald and
jasper and beryl and topaz and ruby.[23]

Such is beauty ever,—neither here nor there, now nor then,—neither in
Rome nor in Athens, but wherever there is a soul to admire. If I seek
her elsewhere because I do not find her at home, my search will prove
a fruitless one.


ZENO

_Feb. 7._ Zeno, the Stoic, stood in precisely the same relation to
the world that I do now. He is, forsooth, bred a merchant—as how many
still!—and can trade and barter, and perchance higgle, and moreover he
can be shipwrecked and cast ashore at the Piræus, like one of your Johns
or Thomases.

He strolls into a shop and is charmed by a book by Xenophon—and
straightway he becomes a philosopher. The sun of a new life's day rises
to him,—serene and unclouded,—which looks over στοά. And still the
fleshly Zeno sails on, shipwrecked, buffeted, tempest-tossed; but the
true Zeno sails ever a placid sea. Play high, play low,—rain, sleet,
or snow,—it's all the same with the Stoic. "Propriety and decorum" were
his Palinurus,—not the base progeny of fashion, but the suggestions of
an experienced taste.

When evening comes he sits down unwearied to the review of his
day,—what's done that's to be undone,—what not done at all still
to be done. Himself Truth's unconcerned helpmate. Another system of
book-keeping this than that the Cyprian trader to Phœnicia practiced!

This was he who said to a certain garrulous young man, "On this account
have we two ears and but one mouth, that we may hear more, and speak
less."

That he had talked concerned not our philosopher, but his audience;
and herein we may see how it is more noble to hear than to speak. The
wisest may apologize that he only said so to hear himself talk, for if
he _heard_ not, as well for him had he never spoken. What is all this
gabble to the _gabbler_? Only the silent reap the profit of it.


SOCIETY

_Feb. 9._ It is wholesome advice,—"to be a man amongst folks." Go into
society if you will, or if you are unwilling, and take a human interest
in its affairs. If you mistake these Messieurs and Mesdames for so many
men and women, it is but erring on the safe side,—or, rather, it is
their error and not yours. Armed with a manly sincerity, you shall not
be trifled with, but drive this business of life. It matters not how
many men are to be addressed,—rebuked,—provided one man rebuke them.


SMALL TALK

To manage the small talk of a party is to make an effort to do what was
at first done, admirably because naturally, at your fireside.


INFLUENCE

_Feb. 13._ It is hard to subject ourselves to an influence. It must
steal upon us when we expect it not, and its work be all done ere we
are aware of it. If we make advances, it is shy; if, when we feel its
presence, we presume to pry into its free-masonry, it vanishes and
leaves us alone in our folly,—brimful but stagnant,—a full channel, it
may be, but no inclination.


FEAR

All fear of the world or consequences is swallowed up in a manly anxiety
to do Truth justice.


OLD BOOKS

_Feb. 15._ The true student will cleave ever to the good, recognizing
no Past, no Present; but wherever he emerges from the bosom of time,
his course is not with the sun,—eastward or westward,—but ever towards
the seashore. Day and night pursues he his devious way, lingering by how
many a Pierian spring, how many an Academus grove, how many a sculptured
portico!—all which—spring, grove, and portico—lie not so wide but he
may take them conveniently in his way.


GREECE

_Feb. 16._ In imagination I hie me to Greece as to enchanted ground.
No storms vex her coasts, no clouds encircle her Helicon or Olympus,
no tempests sweep the peaceful Tempe or ruffle the bosom of the
placid Ægean; but always the beams of the summer's sun gleam along
the entablature of the Acropolis, or are reflected through the mellow
atmosphere from a thousand consecrated groves and fountains; always her
sea-girt isles are dallying with their zephyr guests, and the low of
kine is heard along the meads, and the landscape sleeps—valley and hill
and woodland—a dreamy sleep. Each of her sons created a new heaven and
a new earth for Greece.


SUNDAY

_Feb. 18._ Rightly named Suna-day, or day of the sun. One is satisfied
in some angle by wood-house and garden fence to bask in his beams—to
exist barely—the livelong day.


SPRING

I had not been out long to-day when it seemed that a new Spring was
already born,—not quite weaned, it is true, but verily entered upon
existence. Nature struck up "the same old song in the grass," despite
eighteen inches of snow, and I contrived to smuggle away a grin of
satisfaction by a smothered "Pshaw! and is that all?"


_Feb. 19._

     Each summer sound
     Is a summer round.[24]


GOETHE

_Feb. 27._ He jogs along at a snail's pace, but ever mindful that the
earth is beneath and the heavens above him. His Italy is not merely
the fatherland of lazzaroni and maccaroni but a solid turf-clad
soil, daily illumined by a genial sun and nightly gleaming in the
still moonshine,—to say nothing of the frequent showers which are
so faithfully recorded. That sail to Palermo was literally a plowing
through of the waves from Naples to Trinacria,—the sky overhead, and
the sea with its isles on either hand.

His hearty good-will to all men is most amiable; not one cross word
has he spoken, but on one occasion, the post boy snivelling, "Signore,
perdonate! quésta è la mia patria," he confesses, "to me poor northerner
came something tear-like into the eyes."[25]


SPRING

_March 1._ March fans it, April christens it, and May puts on its jacket
and trousers. It never grows up, but Alexandrian-like "drags its slow
length along," ever springing, bud following close upon leaf, and when
winter comes it is not annihilated, but creeps on mole-like under the
snow, showing its face nevertheless occasionally by fuming springs and
watercourses.

So let it be with man,—let his manhood be a more advanced and still
advancing youth, bud following hard upon leaf. By the side of the
ripening corn let's have a second or third crop of peas and turnips,
decking the fields in a new green. So amid clumps of sere herd's-grass
sometimes flower the violet and buttercup spring-born.


HOMER

_March 3._ Three thousand years and the world so little changed! The
Iliad seems like a natural sound which has reverberated to our days.
Whatever in it is still freshest in the memories of men was most
childlike in the poet. It is the problem of old age,—a second childhood
exhibited in the life of the world. Phœbus Apollo went like night,—ὁ
δ' ἤιε νυκτὶ ἐοικώς. This either refers to the gross atmosphere of the
plague darkening the sun, or to the crescent of night rising solemn and
stately in the east while the sun is setting in the west.

Then Agamemnon darkly lowers on Calchas, prophet of evil,—ὄσσε δέ οἱ
πυρὶ λαμπετόωντε ἐΐκτην,—such a fire-eyed Agamemnon as you may see at
town meetings and elections, as well here as in Troy neighborhood.


A SUNDAY SCENE

_March 4._ Here at my elbow sit five notable, or at least noteworthy,
representatives of this nineteenth century,—of the gender feminine.
One a sedate, indefatigable knitter, not spinster, of the old school,
who had the supreme felicity to be born in days that tried men's souls,
who can, and not unfrequently does, say with Nestor, another of the old
school: "But you are younger than I. For time was when I conversed with
greater men than you. For not at any time have I seen such men, nor
shall see them, as Perithous, and Dryas, and ποιμένα λαῶν," or, in one
word, sole "shepherd of the people," Washington.

And when Apollo has now six times rolled westward, or seemed to roll,
and now for the seventh time shows his face in the east, eyes well-nigh
glazed, long glassed, which have fluctuated only between lamb's wool and
worsted, explore ceaseless some good sermon book. For six days shalt
thou labor and do all thy knitting, but on the seventh, forsooth, thy
reading.[26]

Opposite, across this stone hearth, sits one of no school, but rather
one who schools, a spinster who spins not, with elbow resting on the
book of books, but with eyes turned towards the vain trumpery of that
shelf,—trumpery of sere leaves, blossoms, and waxwork, built on sand,
that presumes to look quite as gay, smell quite as earthy, as though
this were not by good rights the sun's day. I marked how she spurned
that innocent every-day book, "Germany by De Staël," as though a viper
had stung her;—better to rest the elbow on The Book than the eye on such
a page. Poor book! this is thy last chance.

Happy I who can bask in this warm spring sun which illumines all
creatures, as well when they rest as when they toil, not without a
feeling of gratitude! whose life is as blameless—how blameworthy soever
it be—on the Lord's Mona-day as on his Suna-day![27]

Thus much at least a man may do: he may not impose on his
fellows,—perhaps not on himself. Thus much _let_ a man do: confidently
and heartily live up to his thought; for its error, if there be any,
will soonest appear in practice, and if there be none, so much he may
reckon as actual progress in the way of living.


HOMER

The poet does not leap, even in imagination, from Asia to Greece through
mid-air, neglectful of the fair sea and still fairer land beneath him,
but jogs on humanly observant over the intervening segment of a sphere,—

                 ἐπειὴ μάλα πολλὰ μεταξύ
     Οὔρεά τε σκιόεντα, θάλασσά τε ἠχήεσσα,—

                 for there are very many
     Shady mountains, and resounding seas between.[28]


_March 5._ How often, when Achilles like one διάνδιχα μερμήριξεν whether
to retaliate or suppress his wrath, has his good Genius, like Pallas
Athene, gliding down from heaven, θυμῷ φιλέουσά τε, κηδομένη τε, stood
behind him, and whispered peace in his ear![29]

Men may dispute about the fact whether a goddess did actually come down
from heaven, calling it a poet's fancy, but was it not, considering the
stuff that gods are made of, a very truth?


THE AGE OF HONEY

     "And to them rose up the sweet-worded Nestor, the shrill orator of
           the Pylians,
     And words _sweeter than honey_ flowed from his tongue."[30]

E'en in old Homer's day was honey sweet,—not yet is sour,—tickling the
palate of the blind old man, forsooth, with fresher sweet; then, as now,
whene'er from leaky jar or drivelling lips it daubed the festive board,
proving a baneful lure to swarms of parasites, Homer's cotemporaries,
but alas! like Phthian hero, vulnerable in heel.


WHAT TO DO

But what does all this scribbling amount to? What is now scribbled
in the heat of the moment one can contemplate with somewhat of
satisfaction, but alas! to-morrow—aye, to-night—it is stale, flat, and
unprofitable,—in fine, is not, only its shell remains, like some red
parboiled lobster-shell which, kicked aside never so often, still stares
at you in the path.

What may a man do and not be ashamed of it? He may not do nothing
surely, for straightway he is dubbed Dolittle—aye! christens himself
first—and reasonably, for he was first to duck. But let him do
something, is he the less a Dolittle? Is it actually something done, or
not rather something undone; or, if done, is it not badly done, or at
most well done comparatively?

Such is man,—toiling, heaving, struggling ant-like to shoulder some
stray unappropriated crumb and deposit it in his granary; then runs
out, complacent, gazes heavenward, earthward (for even pismires can look
down), heaven and earth meanwhile looking downward, upward; there seen
of men, world-seen, deed-delivered, vanishes into all-grasping night.
And is he doomed ever to run the same course? Can he not, wriggling,
screwing, self-exhorting, self-constraining, wriggle or screw out
something that shall live,—respected, intact, intangible, not to be
sneezed at?[31]


_March 6._ How can a man sit down and quietly pare his nails, while the
earth goes gyrating ahead amid such a din of sphere music, whirling him
along about her axis some twenty-four thousand miles between sun and
sun, but mainly in a circle some two millions of miles actual progress?
And then such a hurly-burly on the surface—wind always blowing—now a
zephyr, now a hurricane—tides never idle, ever fluctuating—no rest for
Niagara, but perpetual ran-tan on those limestone rocks—and then that
summer simmering which our ears are used to, which would otherwise be
christened confusion worse confounded, but is now ironically called
"silence audible," and above all the incessant tinkering named "hum of
industry," the hurrying to and fro and confused jabbering of men. Can
man do less than get up and shake himself?


COMPOSITION

_March 7._ We should not endeavor coolly to analyze our thoughts, but,
keeping the pen even and parallel with the current, make an accurate
transcript of them. Impulse is, after all, the best linguist, and for
his logic, if not conformable to Aristotle, it cannot fail to be most
convincing. The nearer we approach to a complete but simple transcript
of our thought the more tolerable will be the piece, for we can endure
to consider ourselves in a state of passivity or in involuntary action,
but rarely our efforts, and least of all our rare efforts.


SCRAPS FROM A LECTURE ON "SOCIETY" WRITTEN MARCH 14TH, 1838, DELIVERED
BEFORE OUR LYCEUM, APRIL 11TH

Every proverb in the newspapers originally stood for a truth. Thus the
proverb that man was made for society, so long as it was not allowed to
conflict with another important truth, deceived no one; but, now that
the same words have come to stand for another thing, it may be for a
lie, we are obliged, in order to preserve its significance, to write it
anew, so that properly it will read, Society was made for man.

       *       *       *       *       *

Man is not at once born into society,—hardly into the world. The world
that he is hides for a time the world that he inhabits.

       *       *       *       *       *

That which properly constitutes the life of every man is a profound
secret. Yet this is what every one would give most to know, but is
himself most backward to impart.

       *       *       *       *       *

Hardly a rood of land but can show its fresh wound or indelible scar,
in proof that earlier or later man has been there.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mass never comes up to the standard of its best member, but on the
contrary degrades itself to a level with the lowest. As the reformers
say, it is a levelling down, not up. Hence the mass is only another
name for the mob. The inhabitants of the earth assembled in one place
would constitute the greatest mob. The mob is spoken of as an insane
and blinded animal; magistrates say it must be humored; they apprehend
it may incline this way or that, as villagers dread an inundation, not
knowing whose land may be flooded, nor how many bridges carried away.

       *       *       *       *       *

One goes to a cattle-show expecting to find many men and women
assembled, and beholds only working oxen and neat cattle. He goes to
a commencement thinking that there at least he may find the men of the
country; but such, if there were any, are completely merged in the day,
and have become so many walking commencements, so that he is fain to
take himself out of sight and hearing of the orator, lest he lose his
own identity in the nonentities around him.

       *       *       *       *       *

But you are getting all the while further and further from true society.
Your silence was an approach to it, but your conversation is only a
refuge from the encounter of men; as though men were to be satisfied
with a meeting of heels, and not heads.

Nor is it better with private assemblies, or meetings together, with a
sociable design, of acquaintances so called,—that is to say of men and
women who are familiar with the lineaments of each other's countenances,
who eat, drink, sleep, and transact the business of living within the
circuit of a mile.

With a beating heart he fares him forth, by the light of the stars, to
this meeting of gods. But the illusion speedily vanishes; what at first
seemed to him nectar and ambrosia, is discovered to be plain bohea and
short gingerbread.

Then with what speed does he throw off his strait-jacket of a godship,
and play the one-eared, two-mouthed mortal, thus proving his title
to the epithet applied to him of old by Homer of μέροψ ἄνθρωπος, or
that possesses an articulating voice. But unfortunately we have as yet
invented no rule by which the stranger may know when he has culminated.
We read that among the Finlanders when one "has succeeded in rendering
himself agreeable, it is a custom at an assemblage for all the women
present to give him on the back a sudden slap, when it is least
expected; and the compliment is in proportion to the weight of the
blow."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is provoking, when one sits waiting the assembling together of his
neighbors around his hearth, to behold merely their clay houses, for the
most part newly shingled and clapboarded, and not unfrequently with a
fresh coat of paint, trundled to his door. He has but to knock slightly
at the outer gate of one of these shingle palaces, to be assured that
the master or mistress is not at home.

After all, the field of battle possesses many advantages over the
drawing-room. There at least is no room for pretension or excessive
ceremony, no shaking of hands or rubbing of noses, which make one
doubt your sincerity, but hearty as well as hard hand-play. It at least
exhibits one of the faces of humanity, the former only a mask.

       *       *       *       *       *

The utmost nearness to which men approach each other amounts barely to
a mechanical contact. As when you rub two stones together, though they
emit an audible sound, yet do they not actually touch each other.

       *       *       *       *       *

In obedience to an instinct of their nature men have pitched their
cabins and planted corn and potatoes within speaking distance of one
another, and so formed towns and villages, but they have not associated,
they have only assembled, and society has signified only a _convention_
of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I think of a playhouse, it is as if we had not time to appreciate
the follies of the day in detail as they occur, and so devoted an hour
of our evening to laughing or crying at them in the lump. Despairing
of a more perfect intercourse, or perhaps never dreaming that such is
desirable, or at least possible, we are contented to act our part in
what deserves to be called the great farce, not drama, of life, like
pitiful and mercenary stock actors whose business it is to keep up the
semblance of a stage.

       *       *       *       *       *

Our least deed, like the young of the land crab, wends its way to the
sea of cause and effect as soon as born, and makes a drop there to
eternity.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let ours be like the meeting of two planets, not hastening to confound
their jarring spheres, but drawn together by the influence of a subtile
attraction, soon to roll diverse in their respective orbits, from this
their perigee, or point of nearest approach.

       *       *       *       *       *

If thy neighbor hail thee to inquire how goes the world, feel thyself
put to thy trumps to return a true and explicit answer. Plant the
feet firmly, and, will he nill he, dole out to him with strict and
conscientious impartiality his modicum of a response.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let not society be the element in which you swim, or are tossed about at
the mercy of the waves, but be rather a strip of firm land running out
into the sea, whose base is daily washed by the tide, but whose summit
only the spring tide can reach.

       *       *       *       *       *

But after all, such a morsel of society as this will not satisfy a
man. But like those women of Malamocco and Pelestrina, who when their
husbands are fishing at sea, repair to the shore and sing their shrill
songs at evening, till they hear the voices of their husbands in reply
borne to them over the water, so go we about indefatigably, chanting
our stanza of the lay, and awaiting the response of a kindred soul out
of the distance.


THE INDIAN AXE

_April 1._ The Indian must have possessed no small share of vital energy
to have rubbed industriously stone upon stone for long months till at
length he had rubbed out an axe or pestle,—as though he had said in the
face of the constant flux of things, I at least will live an enduring
life.


FRIENDSHIP

_April 8._

     I think awhile of Love, and, while I think,
             Love is to me a world,
                     Sole meat and sweetest drink,
             And close connecting link
               'Tween heaven and earth.

     I only know it is, not how or why,
             My greatest happiness;
             However hard I try,
             Not if I were to die,
               Can I explain.

     I fain would ask my friend how it can be,
             But, when the time arrives,
             Then Love is more lovely
             Than anything to me,
               And so I'm dumb.

     For, if the truth were known, Love cannot speak,
             But only thinks and does;
             Though surely out 't will leak
             Without the help of Greek,
               Or any tongue.

     A man may love the truth and practice it,
             Beauty he may admire,
             And goodness not omit,
             As much as may befit
               To reverence.

     But only when these three together meet,
             As they always incline,
             And make one soul the seat
                     And favorite retreat
               Of loveliness;

     When under kindred shape, like loves and hates
             And a kindred nature,
             Proclaim us to be mates,
             Exposed to equal fates
               Eternally;

     And each may other help, and service do,
             Drawing Love's bands more tight,
             Service he ne'er shall rue
             While one and one make two,
               And two are one;

     In such case only doth man fully prove,
             Fully as man can do,
             What power there is in Love
             His inmost soul to move
               Resistlessly.

       *       *       *       *       *

     Two sturdy oaks I mean, which side by side
             Withstand the winter's storm,
             And, spite of wind and tide,
             Grow up the meadow's pride,
               For both are strong.

     Above they barely touch, but, undermined
             Down to their deepest source,
             Admiring you shall find
                     Their roots are intertwined
               Insep'rably.


CONVERSATION

_April 15._ Thomas Fuller relates that "in Merionethshire, in Wales,
there are high mountains, whose hanging tops come so close together
that shepherds on the tops of several hills may audibly talk together,
yet will it be a day's journey for their bodies to meet, so vast is
the hollowness of the valleys betwixt them." As much may be said in a
moral sense of our intercourse in the plains, for, though we may audibly
converse together, yet is there so vast a gulf of hollowness between
that we are actually many days' journey from a veritable communication.


STEAMSHIPS

_April 24._ Men have been contriving new means and modes of motion.
Steamships have been westering during these late days and nights on
the Atlantic waves,—the fuglers of a new evolution to this generation.
Meanwhile plants spring silently by the brooksides, and the grim woods
wave indifferent; the earth emits no howl, pot on fire simmers and
seethes, and men go about their business.


THE BLUEBIRDS

_April 26._

     In the midst of the poplar that stands by our door
     We planted a bluebird box,
     And we hoped before the summer was o'er
     A transient pair to coax.


     One warm summer's day the bluebirds came
     And lighted on our tree,
     But at first the wand'rers were not so tame
     But they were afraid of me.

     They seemed to come from the distant south,
     Just over the Walden wood,
     And they skimmed it along with open mouth
     Close by where the bellows stood.

     Warbling they swept round the distant cliff,
     And they warbled it over the lea,
     And over the blacksmith's shop in a jiff
     Did they come warbling to me.

     They came and sat on the box's top
     Without looking into the hole,
     And only from this side to that did they hop,
     As 'twere a common well-pole.

     Methinks I had never seen them before,
     Nor indeed had they seen me,
     Till I chanced to stand by our back door,
     And they came to the poplar tree.

     In course of time they built their nest
     And reared a happy brood,
     And every morn they piped their best
     As they flew away to the wood.

     Thus wore the summer hours away
     To the bluebirds and to me,
     And every hour was a summer's day,
     So pleasantly lived we.

     They were a world within themselves,
     And I a world in me,
     Up in the tree—the little elves—
     With their callow family.

     One morn the wind blowed cold and strong,
     And the leaves went whirling away;
     The birds prepared for their journey long
     That raw and gusty day.

     Boreas came blust'ring down from the north,
     And ruffled their azure smocks,
     So they launched them forth, though somewhat loth,
     By way of the old Cliff rocks.

     Meanwhile the earth jogged steadily on
     In her mantle of purest white,
     And anon another spring was born
     When winter was vanished quite.

     And I wandered forth o'er the steamy earth,
     And gazed at the mellow sky,
     But never before from the hour of my birth
     Had I wandered so thoughtfully.

     For never before was the earth so still,
     And never so mild was the sky,
     The river, the fields, the woods, and the hill
     Seemed to heave an audible sigh.


     I felt that the heavens were all around,
     And the earth was all below,
     As when in the ears there rushes a sound
     Which thrills you from top to toe.

     I dreamed that I was a waking thought,
     A something I hardly knew,
     Not a solid piece, nor an empty nought,
     But a drop of morning dew.

     'Twas the world and I at a game of bo-peep,
     As a man would dodge his shadow,
     An idea becalmed in eternity's deep,
     'Tween Lima and Segraddo.

     Anon a faintly warbled note
     From out the azure deep
     Into my ears did gently float
     As is the approach of sleep.

     It thrilled but startled not my soul;
     Across my mind strange mem'ries gleamed,
     As often distant scenes unroll
     When we have lately dreamed.

     The bluebird had come from the distant South
     To his box in the poplar tree,
     And he opened wide his slender mouth
     On purpose to sing to me.


JOURNEY TO MAINE

_May 3-4._ Boston to Portland.

What, indeed, is this earth to us of New England but a field for Yankee
speculation? The Nantucket whaler goes a-fishing round it, and so knows
it,—what it is, how long, how broad, and that no tortoise sustains
it. He who has visited the confines of his real estate, looking out on
all sides into space, will feel a new inducement to _be_ the lord of
creation.

We must all pay a small tribute to Neptune; the chief engineer must once
have been seasick.

Midnight—head over the boat's side—between sleeping and waking—with
glimpses of one or more lights in the vicinity of Cape Ann. Bright
moonlight—the effect heightened by seasickness. Beyond that light yonder
have my lines hitherto been cast, but now I know that there lies not
the whole world, for I can say it is there and not here.

_May 4._ Portland. There is a proper and only right way to enter a city,
as well as to make advances to a strange person; neither will allow of
the least forwardness nor bustle. A sensitive person can hardly elbow
his way boldly, laughing and talking, into a strange town, without
experiencing some twinges of conscience, as when he has treated a
stranger with too much familiarity.

_May 5._ Portland to Bath _via_ Brunswick; Bath to Brunswick.

Each one's world is but a clearing in the forest, so much open and
inclosed ground. When the mail coach rumbles into one of these, the
villagers gaze after you with a compassionate look, as much as to say:
"Where have you been all this time, that you make your début in the
world at this late hour? Nevertheless, here we are; come and study us,
that you may learn men and manners."

_May 6._ Brunswick to Augusta _via_ Gardiner and Hallowell.

_May 7._ We occasionally meet an individual of a character and
disposition so entirely the reverse of our own that we wonder if he
can indeed be another man like ourselves. We doubt if we ever could
draw any nearer to him, and understand him. Such was the old English
gentleman whom I met with to-day in H. Though I peered in at his eyes
I could not discern myself reflected therein. The chief wonder was how
we could ever arrive at so fair-seeming an intercourse upon so small
ground of sympathy. He walked and fluttered like a strange bird at my
side, prying into and making a handle of the least circumstance. The
bustle and rapidity of our communication were astonishing; we skated
in our conversation. All at once he would stop short in the path, and,
in an abstracted air, query whether the steamboat had reached Bath or
Portland, addressing me from time to time as his familiar genius, who
could understand what was passing in his mind without the necessity of
uninterrupted oral communication.

_May 8._ Augusta to Bangor _via_ China.

_May 10._ Bangor to Oldtown.

The railroad from Bangor to Oldtown is civilization shooting off in
a tangent into the forest. I had much conversation with an old Indian
at the latter place, who sat dreaming upon a scow at the waterside and
striking his deer-skin moccasins against the planks, while his arms hung
listlessly by his side. He was the most communicative man I had met.
Talked of hunting and fishing, old times and new times. Pointing up the
Penobscot, he observed, "Two or three mile up the river one beautiful
country!" and then, as if he would come as far to meet me as I had
gone to meet him, he exclaimed, "Ugh! one very hard time!" But he had
mistaken his man.

_May 11._ Bangor to Belfast _via_ Saturday Cove.

_May 12._ Belfast.

_May 13._ To Castine by sailboat "Cinderilla [_sic_]."

_May 14._ Castine to Belfast by packet, Captain Skinner. Found the Poems
of Burns and an odd volume of the "Spectator" in the cabin.

_May 15._ Belfast to Bath _via_ Thomaston.

_May 16._ To Portland.

_May 17._ To Boston and Concord.


MAY MORNING

_May 21._

     The school-boy loitered on his way to school,
     Scorning to live so rare a day by rule.
     So mild the air a pleasure 'twas to breathe,
     For what seems heaven above was earth beneath.

     Soured neighbors chatted by the garden pale,
     Nor quarrelled who should drive the needed nail;
     The most unsocial made new friends that day,
     As when the sun shines husbandmen make hay.

     How long I slept I know not, but at last
     I felt my consciousness returning fast,
     For Zephyr rustled past with leafy tread,
     And heedlessly with one heel grazed my head.

     My eyelids opened on a field of blue,
     For close above a nodding violet grew;
     A part of heaven it seemed, which one could scent,
     Its blue commingling with the firmament.


WALDEN

_June 3._

     True, our converse a stranger is to speech;
     Only the practiced ear can catch the surging words
     That break and die upon thy pebbled lips.
     Thy flow of thought is noiseless as the lapse of thy own waters,
     Wafted as is the morning mist up from thy surface,
     So that the passive Soul doth breathe it in,
     And is infected with the truth thou wouldst express.

     E'en the remotest stars have come in troops
     And stooped low to catch the benediction
     Of thy countenance. Oft as the day came round,
     Impartial has the sun exhibited himself
     Before thy narrow skylight; nor has the moon
     For cycles failed to roll this way
     As oft as elsewhither, and tell thee of the night.
     No cloud so rare but hitherward it stalked,
     And in thy face looked doubly beautiful.
     O! tell me what the winds have writ for the last thousand years
     On the blue vault that spans thy flood,
     Or sun transferred and delicately reprinted
     For thy own private reading. Somewhat
     Within these latter days I've read,
     But surely there was much that would have thrilled the Soul,
     Which human eye saw not.
     I would give much to read that first bright page,
     Wet from a virgin press, when Eurus, Boreas,
     And the host of airy quill-drivers
     First dipped their pens in mist.


_June 14._

     Truth, Goodness, Beauty,—those celestial thrins,[32]
     Continually are born; e'en now the Universe,
     With thousand throats, and eke with greener smiles,
     Its joy confesses at their recent birth.

     Strange that so many fickle gods, as fickle as the weather,
     Throughout Dame Nature's provinces should always pull together.


_June 16._

     In the busy streets, domains of trade,
     Man is a surly porter, or a vain and hectoring bully,
     Who can claim no nearer kindredship with me
     Than brotherhood by law.


CLIFFS

_July 8._

     The loudest sound that burdens here the breeze
     Is the wood's whisper; 'tis, when we choose to list,
     Audible sound, and when we list not,
     It is calm profound. Tongues were provided
     But to vex the ear with superficial thoughts.
     When deeper thoughts upswell, the jarring discord
     Of harsh speech is hushed, and senses seem
     As little as may be to share the ecstasy.


HEROISM

_July 13._ What a hero one can be without moving a finger! The world
is not a field worthy of us, nor can we be satisfied with the plains of
Troy. A glorious strife seems waging within us, yet so noiselessly that
we but just catch the sound of the clarion ringing of victory, borne
to us on the breeze. There are in each the seeds of a heroic ardor,
which need only to be stirred in with the _soil where they lie_, by an
inspired voice or pen, to bear fruit of a divine flavor.[33]


SUSPICION

_July 15._ What though friends misinterpret your conduct, if it is right
in sight of God and Nature. The wrong, if there be any, pertains only to
the wrongdoer, nor is the integrity of your relations to the universe
affected, but you may gather encouragement from their mistrust. If the
friend withhold his favor, yet does greater float gratuitous on the
zephyr.


TRUTH

_Aug. 4._ Whatever of past or present wisdom has published itself to the
world, is palpable falsehood till it come and utter itself by my side.



SPHERE MUSIC

_Aug. 5._ Some sounds seem to reverberate along the plain, and then
settle to earth again like dust; such are Noise, Discord, Jargon.
But such only as spring heavenward, and I may catch from steeples and
hilltops in their upward course, which are the more refined parts of
the former, are the true sphere music,—pure, unmixed music,—in which no
wail mingles.


DIVINE SERVICE IN THE ACADEMY HALL

In dark places and dungeons these words might perhaps strike root and
grow, but utter them in the daylight and their dusky hues are apparent.
From this window I can compare the written with the preached word:
within is weeping, and wailing, and gnashing of teeth; without, grain
fields and grasshoppers, which give those the lie direct.


THE TIME OF THE UNIVERSE

_Aug. 10._ Nor can all the vanities that so vex the world alter one
whit the measure that night has chosen, but ever it must be short
particular metre. The human soul is a silent harp in God's quire,
whose strings need only to be swept by the divine breath to chime in
with the harmonies of creation. Every pulse-beat is in exact time with
the cricket's chant, and the tickings of the death-watch in the wall.
Alternate with these if you can.[34]


CONSCIOUSNESS

_Aug. 13._ If with closed ears and eyes I consult consciousness for a
moment, immediately are all walls and barriers dissipated, earth rolls
from under me, and I float, by the impetus derived from the earth and
the system, a subjective, heavily laden thought, in the midst of an
unknown and infinite sea, or else heave and swell like a vast ocean
of thought, without rock or headland, where are all riddles solved,
all straight lines making there their two ends to meet, eternity and
space gambolling familiarly through my depths. I am from the beginning,
knowing no end, no aim. No sun illumines me, for I dissolve all lesser
lights in my own intenser and steadier light. I am a restful kernel in
the magazine of the universe.


RESOURCE

Men are constantly dinging in my ears their fair theories and plausible
solutions of the universe, but ever there is no help, and I return again
to my shoreless, islandless ocean, and fathom unceasingly for a bottom
that will hold an anchor, that it may not drag.


SABBATH BELL

_Aug. 19._ The sound of the sabbath bell, whose farthest waves are
at this instant breaking on these cliffs, does not awaken pleasing
associations alone. Its muse is wonderfully condescending and
philanthropic. One involuntarily leans on his staff to humor the
unusually meditative mood. It is as the sound of many catechisms and
religious books twanging a canting peal round the world, and seems
to issue from some Egyptian temple, and echo along the shore of the
Nile, right opposite to Pharaoh's palace and Moses in the bulrushes,
startling a multitude of storks and alligators basking in the sun. Not
so these larks and pewees of Musketaquid. One is sick at heart of this
pagoda worship. It is like the beating of gongs in a Hindoo subterranean
temple.[35]


HOLY WAR

_Aug. 21._ Passion and appetite are always an unholy land in which
one may wage most holy war. Let him steadfastly follow the banner of
his faith till it is planted on the enemy's citadel. Nor shall he lack
fields to display his valor in, nor straits worthy of him. For when he
has blown his blast, and smote those within reach, invisible enemies
will not cease to torment him, who yet may be starved out in the
garrisons where they lie.


SCRIPTURE

_Aug. 22._ How thrilling a noble sentiment in the oldest books,—in
Homer, the Zendavesta, or Confucius! It is a strain of music wafted down
to us on the breeze of time, through the aisles of innumerable ages. By
its very nobleness it is made near and audible to us.


EVENING SOUNDS

_Aug. 26._ How strangely sounds of revelry strike the ear from over
cultivated fields by the woodside, while the sun is declining in the
west. It is a world we had not known before. We listen and are capable
of no mean act or thought. We tread on Olympus and participate in the
councils of the gods.


HOMER

It does one's heart good if Homer but say the sun sets,—or, "As when
beautiful stars accompany the bright moon through the serene heavens;
and the woody hills and cliffs are discerned through the mild light,
and each star is visible, and the shepherd rejoices in his heart."[36]


THE LOSS OF A TOOTH

_Aug. 27._ Verily I am the creature of circumstances. Here I have
swallowed an indispensable tooth, and so am no whole man, but a lame
and halting piece of manhood. I am conscious of no gap in my soul, but
it would seem that, now the entrance to the oracle has been enlarged,
the more rare and commonplace the responses that issue from it. I
have felt cheap, and hardly dared hold up my head among men, ever
since this accident happened. Nothing can I do as well and freely as
before; nothing do I undertake but I am hindered and balked by this
circumstance. What a great matter a little spark kindleth! I believe if
I were called at this moment to rush into the thickest of the fight, I
should halt for lack of so insignificant a piece of armor as a tooth.
Virtue and Truth go undefended, and Falsehood and Affectation are thrown
in my teeth,—though I am toothless. One does not need that the earth
quake for the sake of excitement, when so slight a crack proves such an
impassable moat. But let the lame man shake his leg, and match himself
with the fleetest in the race. So shall he do what is in him to do. But
let him who has lost a tooth open his mouth wide and gabble, lisp, and
sputter never so resolutely.


DEFORMITY

_Aug. 29._ Here at the top of Nawshawtuct, this mild August afternoon,
I can discern no deformed thing. The prophane hay-makers in yonder
meadow are yet the hay-makers of poetry,—forsooth Faustus and Amyntas.
Yonder schoolhouse of brick, than which, near at hand, nothing can be
more mote-like to my eye, serves even to heighten the picturesqueness
of the scene. Barns and outbuildings, which in the nearness mar by their
presence the loveliness of nature, are not only endurable, but, observed
where they lie by some waving field of grain or patch of woodland, prove
a very cynosure to the pensive eye. Let man after infinite hammering
and din of crows uprear a deformity in the plain, yet will Nature have
her revenge on the hilltop. Retire a stone's throw and she will have
changed his base metal into gold.


CRICKETS

The crackling flight of grasshoppers is a luxury; and pleasant is it
when summer has once more followed in the steps of winter to hear scald
cricket piping a Nibelungenlied in the grass. It is the most infinite
of singers. Wiselier had the Greeks chosen a golden cricket, and let
the grasshopper eat grass. One opens both his ears to the invisible,
incessant quire, and doubts if it be not earth herself chanting for all
time.


GENII

In the vulgar daylight of our self-conceit, good genii are still
overlooking and conducting us; as the stars look down on us by day as
by night—and we observe them not.


SPHERE MUSIC

_Sept. 2._ The cocks chant a strain of which we never tire. Some
there are who find pleasure in the melody of birds and chirping of
crickets,—aye, even the peeping of frogs. Such faint sounds as these are
for the most part heard above the weeping and wailing and gnashing of
teeth which so unhallow the Sabbath among us. The moan the earth makes
is after all a very faint sound, infinitely inferior in volume to its
creakings of joy and gleeful murmurs; so that we may expect the next
balloonist will rise above the utmost range of discordant sounds into
the region of pure melody. Never so loud was the wail but it seemed to
taper off into a piercing melody and note of joy, which lingered not
amid the clods of the valley.


CREEDS

_Sept. 3._ The only faith that men recognize is a creed. But the true
creed which we unconsciously live by, and which rather adopts us than we
it, is quite different from the written or preached one. Men anxiously
hold fast to their creed, as to a straw, thinking this does them good
service because their sheet anchor does not drag.[37]


RIVERS

_Sept. 5._ For the first time it occurred to me this afternoon what a
piece of wonder a river is,—a huge volume of matter ceaselessly rolling
through the fields and meadows of this substantial earth, making
haste from the high places, by stable dwellings of men and Egyptian
Pyramids, to its restless reservoir. One would think that, by a very
natural impulse, the dwellers upon the headwaters of the Mississippi
and Amazon would follow in the trail of their waters to see the end of
the matter.[38]


HOMER

_Sept. 7._ When Homer's messengers repair to the tent of Achilles, we do
not have to wonder how they get there, but step by step accompany them
along the shore of the resounding sea.[39]


FLOW OF SPIRITS IN YOUTH

_Sept. 15._ How unaccountable the flow of spirits in youth. You may
throw sticks and dirt into the current, and it will only rise the
higher. Dam it up you may, but dry it up you may not, for you cannot
reach its source. If you stop up this avenue or that, anon it will come
gurgling out where you least expected and wash away all fixtures. Youth
grasps at happiness as an inalienable right. The tear does no sooner
gush than glisten. Who shall say when the tear that sprung of sorrow
first sparkled with joy?


ALMA NATURA

_Sept. 20._ It is a luxury to muse by a wall-side in the sunshine of
a September afternoon,—to cuddle down under a gray stone, and hearken
to the siren song of the cricket. Day and night seem henceforth but
accidents, and the time is always a still eventide, and as the close of
a happy day. Parched fields and mulleins gilded with the slanting rays
are my diet. I know of no word so fit to express this disposition of
Nature as Alma Natura.


COMPENSATION

_Sept. 23._ If we will be quiet and ready enough, we shall find
compensation in every disappointment. If a shower drives us for shelter
to the maple grove or the trailing branches of the pine, yet in their
recesses with microscopic eye we discover some new wonder in the bark,
or the leaves, or the fungi at our feet. We are interested by some
new resource of insect economy, or the chickadee is more than usually
familiar. We can study Nature's nooks and corners then.[40]


MY BOOTS

_Oct. 16._

     Anon with gaping fearlessness they quaff
     The dewy nectar with a natural thirst,
     Or wet their leathern lungs where cranberries lurk,
     With sweeter wine than Chian, Lesbian, or Falernian far.
     Theirs was the inward lustre that bespeaks
     An open sole—unknowing to exclude
     The cheerful day—a worthier glory far
     Than that which gilds the outmost rind with darkness visible—
     Virtues that fast abide through lapse of years,
     Rather rubbed in than off.


HOMER

_Oct. 21._ Hector hurrying from rank to rank is likened to the moon
wading in majesty from cloud to cloud. We are reminded of the hour of
the day by the fact that the woodcutter spreads now his morning meal in
the recesses of the mountains, having already laid his axe at the root
of many lofty trees.[41]


_Oct. 23._ Nestor's simple repast after the rescue of Machaon is a fit
subject for poetry. The woodcutter may sit down to his cold victuals,
the hero to soldier's fare, and the wild Arab to his dried dates and
figs, without offense; but not so a modern gentleman to his dinner.


_Oct. 24._ It matters not whether these strains originate there in the
grass or float thitherward like atoms of light from the minstrel days
of Greece.

"The snowflakes fall thick and fast on a winter's day. The winds
are lulled, and the snow falls incessant, covering the tops of the
mountains, and the hills, and the plains where the lotus tree grows, and
the cultivated fields. And they are falling by the inlets and shores of
the foaming sea, but are silently dissolved by the waves."[42]


SPECULATION

_Dec. 7._ We may believe it, but never do we live a quiet, free
life, such as Adam's, but are enveloped in an invisible network of
speculations. Our progress is only from one such speculation to another,
and only at rare intervals do we perceive that it is no progress. Could
we for a moment drop this by-play, and simply wonder, without reference
or inference!


BYRON

_Dec. 8._ Nothing in nature is sneaking or chapfallen, as somewhat
maltreated and slighted, but each is satisfied with its being, and so
is as lavender and balm. If skunk-cabbage is offensive to the nostrils
of men, still has it not drooped in consequence, but trustfully
unfolded its leaf of two hands' breadth. What was it to Lord Byron
whether England owned or disowned him, whether he smelled sour and was
skunk-cabbage to the English nostril or violet-like, the pride of the
land and ornament of every lady's boudoir? Let not the oyster grieve
that he has lost the race; he has gained as an oyster.


FAIR HAVEN[43]

_Dec. 15._

     When winter fringes every bough
     With his fantastic wreath,
     And puts the seal of silence now
     Upon the leaves beneath;

     When every stream in its penthouse
     Goes gurgling on its way,
     And in his gallery the mouse
     Nibbleth the meadow hay;

     Methinks the summer still is nigh,
     And lurketh there below,
     As that same meadow mouse doth lie
     Snug underneath the snow.


     And if perchance the chickadee
     Lisp a faint note anon,
     The snow is summer's canopy,
     Which she herself put on.

     Rare blossoms deck the cheerful trees,
     And dazzling fruits depend,
     The north wind sighs a summer breeze,
     The nipping frosts to fend,

     Bringing glad tidings unto me,
     While that I stand all ear,
     Of a serene eternity,
     That need not winter fear.

     Out on the silent pond straightway
     The restless ice doth crack,
     And pond sprites merry gambols play
     Amid the deaf'ning rack.

     Eager I press me to the vale
     As I had heard brave news,
     How nature held high festival,
     Which it were hard to lose.

     I crack me with my neighbor ice,
     And sympathizing quake,
     As each new rent darts in a trice
     Across the gladsome lake.

     One with the cricket in the ground,
     And fuel on the hearth,
     Resounds the rare domestic sound
     Along the forest path.

     Fair Haven is my huge tea-urn
     That seethes and sings to me,
     And eke the crackling fagots burn,—
     A homebred minstrelsy.


SOME SCRAPS FROM AN ESSAY ON "SOUND AND SILENCE" WRITTEN IN THE LATTER
HALF OF THIS MONTH,—DECEMBER, 1838[44]

As the truest society approaches always nearer to solitude, so the
most excellent speech finally falls into silence. We go about to find
Solitude and Silence, as though they dwelt only in distant glens and the
depths of the forest, venturing out from these fastnesses at midnight.
Silence _was_, say we, before ever the world was, as if creation had
displaced her, and were not her visible framework and foil. It is only
favorite dells that she deigns to frequent, and we dream not that she is
then imported into them when we wend thither, as Selden's butcher busied
himself with looking after his knife, when he had it in his mouth. For
where man is, there is Silence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Silence is the communing of a conscious soul with itself. If the soul
attend for a moment to its own infinity, then and there is silence. She
is audible to all men, at all times, in all places, and if we will we
may always hearken to her admonitions.

       *       *       *       *       *

Silence is ever less strange than noise, lurking amid the boughs of
the hemlock or pine just in proportion as we find ourselves there. The
nuthatch, tapping the upright trunks by our side, is only a partial
spokesman for the solemn stillness.

       *       *       *       *       *

She is always at hand with her wisdom, by roadsides and street corners;
lurking in belfries, the cannon's mouth, and the wake of the earthquake;
gathering up and fondling their puny din in her ample bosom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Those divine sounds which are uttered to our inward ear—which are
breathed in with the zephyr or reflected from the lake—come to us
noiselessly, bathing the temples of the soul, as we stand motionless
amid the rocks.

       *       *       *       *       *

The halloo is the creature of walls and mason work; the whisper is
fittest in the depths of the wood, or by the shore of the lake; but
silence is best adapted to the acoustics of space.

       *       *       *       *       *

All sounds are her servants and purveyors, proclaiming not only that
their mistress is, but is a rare mistress, and earnestly to be sought
after. Behind the most distinct and significant hovers always a more
significant silence which floats it. The thunder is only our signal gun,
that we may know what communion awaits us. Not its dull sound, but the
infinite expansion of our being which ensues, we praise and unanimously
name sublime.

All sound is nearly akin to Silence; it is a bubble on her surface
which straightway bursts, an emblem of the strength and prolificness
of the undercurrent. It is a faint utterance of Silence, and then
only agreeable to our auditory nerves when it contrasts itself with
the former. In proportion as it does this, and is a heightener and
intensifier of the Silence, it is harmony and purest melody.

       *       *       *       *       *

Every melodious sound is the ally of Silence,—a help and not a hindrance
to abstraction.

       *       *       *       *       *

Certain sounds more than others have found favor with the poets only as
foils to silence.

       *       *       *       *       *


ANACREON'S ODE TO THE CICADA[45]

     We pronounce thee happy, cicada,
     For on the tops of the trees,
     Sipping a little dew,
     Like any king thou singest,
     For thine are they all,
     Whatever thou seest in the fields,
     And whatever the woods bear.
     Thou art the friend of the husbandmen,
     In no respect injuring any one;
     And thou art honored among men,
     Sweet prophet of summer.
     The Muses love thee,
     And Phœbus himself loves thee,
     And has given thee a shrill song;
     Age does not wrack thee,
     Thou skillful, earth-born, song-loving,
     Unsuffering, bloodless one;
     Almost thou art like the gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

Silence is the universal refuge, the sequel of all dry discourses and
all foolish acts, as balm to our every chagrin, as welcome after satiety
as [after] disappointment; that background which the painter may not
daub, be he master or bungler, and which, however awkward a figure he
may have made in the foreground, remains ever our inviolable asylum.

       *       *       *       *       *

With what equanimity does the silent consider how his world goes,
settles the awards of virtue and justice, is slandered and buffeted
never so much and views it all as a phenomenon. He is one with Truth,
Goodness, Beauty. No indignity can assail him, no personality disturb
him.

       *       *       *       *       *

The orator puts off his individuality, and is then most eloquent when
most silent. He listens while he speaks, and is a hearer along with his
audience.

       *       *       *       *       *

Who has not hearkened to her infinite din? She is Truth's speaking
trumpet, which every man carries slung over his shoulder, and when he
will may apply to his ear. She is the sole oracle, the true Delphi and
Dodona, which kings and courtiers would do well to consult, nor will
they be balked by an ambiguous answer. Through her have all revelations
been made. Just as far as men have consulted her oracle, they have
obtained a clear insight, and their age been marked for an enlightened
one. But as often as they have gone gadding abroad to a strange Delphi
and her mad priestess, they have been benighted, and their age Dark or
Leaden.—These are garrulous and noisy eras, which no longer yield any
sound; but the Grecian, or _silent_ and melodious, Era is ever sounding
on the ears of men.

       *       *       *       *       *

A good book is the plectrum with which our silent lyres are struck. In
all epics, when, after breathless attention, we come to the significant
words "He said," then especially our inmost man is addressed. We not
unfrequently refer the interest which belongs to our own unwritten
sequel to the written and comparatively lifeless page. Of all valuable
books this same sequel makes an indispensable part. It is the author's
aim to say once and emphatically, "He said." This is the most the
bookmaker can attain to. If he make his volume a foil whereon the
waves of silence may break, it is well. It is not so much the sighing
of the blast as that pause, as Gray expresses it, "when the gust is
recollecting itself," that thrills us, and is infinitely grander than
the importunate howlings of the storm.

       *       *       *       *       *

At evening Silence sends many emissaries to me, some navigating the
subsiding waves which the village murmur has agitated.

       *       *       *       *       *

It were vain for me to interpret the Silence. She cannot be done into
English. For six thousand years have men translated her, with what
fidelity belonged to each; still is she little better than a sealed
book. A man may run on confidently for a time, thinking he has her under
his thumb, and shall one day exhaust her, but he too must at last be
silent, and men remark only how brave a beginning he made; for, when
he at length dives into her, so vast is the disproportion of the told
to the untold that the former will seem but the bubble on the surface
where he disappeared.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nevertheless will we go on, like those Chinese cliff swallows,
feathering our nests with the froth, so they may one day be bread of
life to such as dwell by the seashore.


ANACREONTICS

RETURN OF SPRING[46]

_Dec. 23._

     Behold, how, spring appearing,
     The Graces send forth roses;
     Behold, how the wave of the sea
     Is made smooth by the calm;
     Behold, how the duck dives;
     Behold, how the crane travels;
     And Titan shines constantly bright.
     The shadows of the clouds are moving;
     The works of man shine;
     The earth puts forth fruits;
     The fruit of the olive puts forth.
     The cup of Bacchus is crowned.
     Along the leaves, along the branches,
     The fruit, bending them down, flourishes.


CUPID WOUNDED[47]

     Love once among roses
     A sleeping bee
     Did not see, but was stung;
     And, being wounded in the finger
     Of his hand, cried for pain.
     Running as well as flying
     To the beautiful Venus,
     I am killed, mother, said he,
     I am killed, and I die.
     A little serpent has stung me,
     Winged, which they call
     A bee,—the husbandmen.
     And she said, If the sting
     Of a bee afflicts you,
     How, think you, are they afflicted,
     Love, whom you smite?