Chapter VI 1842.

_Jan. 1._ Virtue is the deed of the bravest. It is that art which
demands the greatest confidence and fearlessness. Only some hardy
soul ventures upon it. Virtue is a bravery so hardy that it deals in
what it has no experience in. The virtuous soul possesses a fortitude
and hardihood which not the grenadier nor pioneer can match. It never
shrunk. It goes singing to its work. Effort is its relaxation. The rude
pioneer work of this world has been done by the most devoted worshippers
of beauty.[320] Their resolution has possessed a keener edge than the
soldier's. In winter is their campaign; they never go into quarters.
They are elastic under the heaviest burden, under the extremest physical
suffering.

Methinks good courage will not flag here on the Atlantic border as long
as we are outflanked by the _Fur Countries_. There is enough in that
sound to cheer one under any circumstances. The spruce, the hemlock,
and the pine will not countenance despair. Methinks some creeds in
vestries and churches do forget the hunter wrapped in furs by the
Great Slave Lake, or how the Esquimaux sledges are drawn by dogs, and
in the twilight of the northern night the hunter does not give over
to follow the seal and walrus over the ice. These men are sick and
of diseased imaginations who would toll the world's knell so soon.
Cannot these sedentary sects do better than prepare the shrouds and
write the epitaphs of those other busy living men? The practical faith
of men belies the preacher's consolation. This is the creed of the
hypochondriac.[321]

There is no infidelity so great as that which prays, and keeps the
Sabbath, and founds churches. The sealer of the South Pacific preaches
a truer doctrine. The church is the hospital for men's souls, but the
reflection that he may one day occupy a ward in it should not discourage
the cheerful labors of the able-bodied man. Let him remember the sick
in their extremities, but not look thither as to his goal.[322]


_Jan. 2. Sunday._ The ringing of the church bell is a much more
melodious sound than any that is heard within the church. All great
values are thus public, and undulate like sound through the atmosphere.
Wealth cannot purchase any great private solace or convenience. Riches
are only the means of sociality. I will depend on the extravagance
of my neighbors for my luxuries, for they will take care to pamper
me if I will be overfed. The poor man who sacrificed nothing for the
gratification seems to derive a safer and more natural enjoyment from
his neighbor's extravagance than he does himself. It is a new natural
product, from the contemplation of which he derives new vigor and solace
as from a natural phenomenon.

In moments of quiet and leisure my thoughts are more apt to revert to
some natural than any human relation.

Chaucer's sincere sorrow in his latter days for the grossness of
his earlier works, and that he "cannot recall and annul" what he had
"written of the base and filthy love of men towards women; but alas they
are now continued from man to man," says he, "and I cannot do what I
desire," is all very creditable to his character.

Chaucer is the make-weight of his century,—a worthy representative
of England while Petrarch and Boccaccio lived in Italy, and Tell and
Tamerlane in Switzerland and Asia, and Bruce and Rienzi in Europe, and
Wickliffe and Gower in his own land. Edward III and John of Gaunt and
the Black Prince complete the company. The fame of Roger Bacon came
down from the preceding century, and Dante, though just departed, still
exerted the influence of a living presence.[323]

With all his grossness he is not undistinguished for the tenderness
and delicacy of his muse. A simple pathos and feminine gentleness is
peculiar to him which not even Wordsworth can match.[324] And then his
best passages of length are marked by a happy and healthy wit which is
rather rare in the poetry of any nation. On the whole, he impresses
me as greater than his reputation, and not a little like Homer and
Shakespeare, for he would have held up his head in their company. Among
the earliest English poets he is their landlord and host, and has the
authority of such. We read him with affection and without criticism,
for he pleads no cause, but speaks for us, his readers, always. He has
that greatness of trust and reliance which compels popularity. He is
for a whole country and country [_sic_] to know and to be proud of.
The affectionate mention which succeeding early poets make of him,
coupling him with Homer and Virgil, is also to be taken into the account
in estimating his character. King James and Dunbar of Scotland speak
with more love and reverence of him than any cotemporary poet of his
predecessors of the last century. That childlike relation, indeed, does
not seem to exist now which was then.[325]


_Jan. 3. Monday._ It is pleasant when one can relieve the grossness of
the kitchen and the table by the simple beauty of his repast, so that
there may be anything in it to attract the eye of the artist even. I
have been popping corn to-night, which is only a more rapid blossoming
of the seed under a greater than July heat. The popped corn is a perfect
winter flower, hinting of anemones and houstonias. For this little grace
man has, mixed in with the vulgarness of his repast, he may well thank
his stars. The law by which flowers unfold their petals seems only to
have operated more suddenly under the intense heat. It looks like a
sympathy in this seed of the corn with its sisters of the vegetable
kingdom, as if by preference it assumed the flower form rather than the
crystalline. Here has bloomed for my repast such a delicate blossom as
will soon spring by the wall-sides. And this is as it should be. Why
should not Nature revel sometimes, and genially relax and make herself
familiar at my board? I would have my house a bower fit to entertain
her. It is a feast of such innocence as might have snowed down. By my
warm hearth sprang these cerealious blossoms; here was the bank where
they grew.

Methinks some such visible token of approval would always accompany the
simple and healthy repast. There would be such a smiling and blessing
upon it. Our appetite should always be so related to our taste, and the
board we spread for its gratification be an epitome of the universal
table which Nature sets by hill and wood and stream for her dumb
pensioners.[326]


_Jan. 5. Wednesday._ I find that whatever hindrances may occur I write
just about the same amount of truth in my Journal; for the record
is more concentrated, and usually it is some very real and earnest
life, after all, that interrupts. All flourishes are omitted. If I saw
wood from morning to night, though I grieve that I could not observe
the train of my thoughts during that time, yet, in the evening, the
few scrannel lines which describe my day's occupations will make the
creaking of the saw more musical than my freest fancies could have been.
I find incessant labor with the hands, which engrosses the attention
also, the best method to remove palaver out of one's style. One will
not dance at his work who has wood to cut and cord before the night
falls in the short days of winter; but every stroke will be husbanded,
and ring soberly through the wood; and so will his lines ring and tell
on the ear, when at evening he settles the accounts of the day. I have
often been astonished at the force and precision of style to which
busy laboring men, unpracticed in writing, easily attain when they
are required to make the effort. It seems as if their sincerity and
plainness were the main thing to be taught in schools,—and yet not in
the schools, but in the fields, in actual service, I should say. The
scholar not unfrequently envies the propriety and emphasis with which
the farmer calls to his team, and confesses that if that lingo were
written it would surpass his labored sentences.

Who is not tired of the weak and flowing periods of the politician
and scholar, and resorts not even to the Farmer's Almanac, to read the
simple account of the month's labor, to restore his tone again? I want
to see a sentence run clear through to the end, as deep and fertile
as a well-drawn furrow which shows that the plow was pressed down to
the beam. If our scholars would lead more earnest lives, we should not
witness those lame conclusions to their ill-sown discourses, but their
sentences would pass over the ground like loaded rollers, and not mere
hollow and wooden ones, to press in the seed and make it germinate.

A well-built sentence, in the rapidity and force with which it works,
may be compared to a modern corn-planter, which furrows out, drops the
seed, and covers it up at one movement.[327]

The scholar requires hard labor as an impetus to his pen. He will learn
to grasp it as firmly and wield it as gracefully and effectually as an
axe or a sword. When I consider the labored periods of some gentleman
scholar, who perchance in feet and inches comes up to the standard of
his race, and is nowise deficient in girth, I am amazed at the immense
sacrifice of thews and sinews. What! these proportions and these bones,
and this their work! How these hands hewed this fragile matter, mere
filagree or embroidery fit for ladies' fingers! Can this be a stalwart
man's work, who has marrow in his backbone and a tendon Achilles in his
heel? They who set up Stonehenge did somewhat,—much in comparison,—if
it were only their strength was once fairly laid out, and they stretched
themselves.[328]

I discover in Raleigh's verses the vices of the courtier. They are
not equally sustained, as if his noble genius were warped by the
frivolous society of the court. He was capable of rising to a remarkable
elevation. His poetry has for the most part a heroic tone and vigor
as of a knight errant. But again there seems to have been somewhat
unkindly in his education, and as if he had by no means grown up to be
the man he promised. He was apparently too genial and loyal a soul, or
rather he was incapable of resisting temptations from that quarter. If
to his genius and culture he could have added the temperament of Fox or
Cromwell, the world would have had cause longer to remember him. He was
the pattern of nobility. One would have said it was by some lucky fate
that he and Shakespeare flourished at the same time in England, and yet
what do we know of their acquaintanceship?


_Jan. 7. Friday._ I am singularly refreshed in winter when I hear tell
of service-berries, pokeweed, juniper. Is not heaven made up of these
cheap summer glories?[329]

The great God is very calm withal. How superfluous is any excitement
in his creatures! He listens equally to the prayers of the believer
and the unbeliever. The moods of man should unfold and alternate as
gradually and placidly as those of nature. The sun shines for aye! The
sudden revolutions of these times and this generation have acquired a
very exaggerated importance. They do not interest me much, for they are
not in harmony with the longer periods of nature. The present, in any
aspect in which it can be presented to the smallest audience, is always
mean. God does not sympathize with the popular movements.


_Jan. 8. Saturday._ When, as now, in January a south wind melts
the snow, and the bare ground appears, covered with sere grass and
occasionally wilted green leaves which seem in doubt whether to let go
their greenness quite or absorb new juices against the coming year,—in
such a season a perfume seems to exhale from the earth itself and the
south wind melts my integuments also. Then is she my mother earth. I
derive a real vigor from the scent of the gale wafted over the naked
ground, as from strong meats, and realize again how man is the pensioner
of Nature. We are always conciliated and cheered when we are fed by
[such] an influence, and our needs are felt to be part of the domestic
economy of Nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

What offends me most in my compositions is the moral element in them.
The repentant say never a brave word. Their resolves should be mumbled
in silence. Strictly speaking, morality is not healthy. Those undeserved
joys which come uncalled and make us more pleased than grateful are they
that sing.

       *       *       *       *       *

One music seems to differ from another chiefly in its more perfect time,
to use this word in a true sense. In the steadiness and equanimity of
music lies its divinity. It is the only assured tone.[330] When men
attain to speak with as settled a faith and as firm assurance, their
voices will sing and their feet march as do the feet of the soldier.
The very dogs howl if time is disregarded. Because of the perfect
time of this music-box—its harmony with itself—is its greater dignity
and stateliness. This music is more nobly related for its more exact
measure. So simple a difference as this more even pace raises it to the
higher dignity.

Man's progress through nature should have an accompaniment of music. It
relieves the scenery, which is seen through it as a subtler element,
like a very clear morning air in autumn. Music wafts me through the
clear, sultry valleys, with only a slight gray vapor against the hills.

Of what manner of stuff is the web of time wove, when these consecutive
sounds called a strain of music can be wafted down through the centuries
from Homer to me, and Homer have been conversant with that same
unfathomable mystery and charm which so newly tingles my ears?[331]
These single strains, these melodious cadences which plainly proceed
out of a very deep meaning and a sustained soul, are the interjections
of God. They are perhaps the expression of the perfect knowledge which
the righteous at length attain to. Am I so like thee, my brother, that
the cadence of two notes affects us alike? Shall I not some time have
an opportunity to thank him who made music? I feel a sad cheer when I
hear these lofty strains,[332] because there must be something in me as
lofty that hears. But ah, I hear them but rarely! Does it not rather
hear me? If my blood were clogged in my veins, I am sure it would run
more freely. God must be very rich, who, for the turning of a pivot,
can pour out such melody on me. It is a little prophet; it tells me
the secrets of futurity. Where are its secrets wound up but in this
box?[333] So much hope had slumbered. There are in music such strains
as far surpass any faith in the loftiness of man's destiny.[334] He must
be very sad before he can comprehend them. The clear, liquid notes from
the morning fields beyond seem to come through a vale of sadness to man,
which gives all music a plaintive air. It hath caught a higher pace than
any virtue I know. It is the arch-reformer. It hastens the sun to his
setting. It invites him to his rising. It is the sweetest reproach, a
measured satire. I know there is a people somewhere [where] this heroism
has place. Or else things are to be learned which it will be sweet
to learn.[335] This cannot be all rumor. When I hear this, I think of
that everlasting and stable something which is not sound, but to be a
thrilling reality, and can consent to go about the meanest work for as
many years of time as it pleases even the Hindoo penance, for a year
of the gods were as nothing to that which shall come after. What, then,
can I do to hasten that other time, or that space where there shall be
no time, and these things be a more living part of my life,—where there
will be no discords in my life?


_Jan. 9. Sunday._ One cannot too soon forget his errors and
misdemeanors; for [to] dwell long upon them is to add to the offense,
and repentance and sorrow can only be displaced by somewhat better,
and which is as free and original as if they had not been. Not to
grieve long for any action, but to go immediately and do freshly and
otherwise, subtracts so much from the wrong. Else we may make the delay
of repentance the punishment of the sin. But a great nature will not
consider its sins as its own, but be more absorbed in the prospect of
that valor and virtue for the future which is more properly it, than in
those improper actions which, by being sins, discover themselves to be
not it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir W. Raleigh's faults are those of a courtier and a soldier. In his
counsels and aphorisms we see not unfrequently the haste and rashness
of a boy. His philosophy was not wide nor deep, but continually giving
way to the generosity of his nature. What he touches he adorns by his
greater humanity and native nobleness, but he touches not the true nor
original. He thus embellishes the old, but does not unfold the new. He
seems to have been fitted by his genius for short flights of impulsive
poetry, but not for the sustained loftiness of Shakespeare or Milton.
He was not wise nor a seer in any sense, but rather one of nature's
nobility; the most generous nature which can be spared to linger in the
purlieus of the court.

His was a singularly perverted genius, with such an inclination to
originality and freedom, and yet who never steered his own course. Of
so fair and susceptible a nature, rather than broad or deep, that he
delayed to slake his thirst at the nearest and even more turbid wells
of truth and beauty. Whose homage to the least fair or noble left no
space for homage to the all fair. The misfortune of his circumstances,
or rather of the man, appears in the fact that he was the author of
"Maxims of State" and "The Cabinet Council" and "The Soul's Errand."


_Feb. 19. Saturday._ I never yet saw two men sufficiently great to meet
as two. In proportion as they are great the differences are fatal,
because they are felt not to be partial but total. Frankness to him
who is unlike me will lead to the utter denial of him. I begin to see
how that the preparation for all issues is to do virtuously. When two
approach to meet, they incur no petty dangers, but they run terrible
risks. Between the sincere there will be no civilities. No greatness
seems prepared for the little decorum, even savage unmannerliness, it
meets from equal greatness.


_Feb. 20. Sunday._ "Examine animal forms geometrically, from man, who
represents the perpendicular, to the reptile which forms the horizontal
line, and then applying to those forms the rules of the exact sciences,
which God himself cannot change, we shall see that visible nature
contains them all; that the combinations of the seven primitive forms
are entirely exhausted, and that, therefore, they can represent all
possible varieties of morality."—From "The True Messiah; or the Old and
New Testaments, examined according to the Principles of the Language of
Nature. By G. Segger," translated from French by Grater.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am amused to see from my window here how busily man has divided and
staked off his domain. God must smile at his puny fences running hither
and thither everywhere over the land.

       *       *       *       *       *

My path hitherto has been like a road through a diversified country,
now climbing high mountains, then descending into the lowest vales.
From the summits I saw the heavens; from the vales I looked up to the
heights again. In prosperity I remember God, or memory is one with
consciousness; in adversity I remember my own elevations, and only hope
to see God again.

It is vain to talk. What do you want? To bandy words, or deliver some
grains of truth which stir within you? Will you make a pleasant rumbling
sound after feasting, for digestion's sake, or such music as the birds
in springtime?

       *       *       *       *       *

The death of friends should inspire us as much as their lives. If they
are great and rich enough, they will leave consolation to the mourners
before the expenses of their funerals.[336] It will not be hard to part
with any worth, because it is worthy. How can any good depart? It does
not go and come, but we. Shall we wait for it? Is it slower than we?


_Feb. 21._ I must confess there is nothing so strange to me as my own
body. I love any other piece of nature, almost, better.

I was always conscious of sounds in nature which my ears could never
hear,—that I caught but the prelude to a strain. She always retreats as
I advance. Away behind and behind is she and her meaning. Will not this
faith and expectation make to itself ears at length? I never saw to the
end, nor heard to the end; but the best part was unseen and unheard.

I am like a feather floating in the atmosphere; on every side is depth
unfathomable.

I feel as if years had been crowded into the last month,[337] and yet
the regularity of what we call time has been so far preserved as that
I[338] ... will be welcome in the present. I have lived ill for the
most part because too near myself. I have tripped myself up, so that
there was no progress for my own narrowness. I cannot walk conveniently
and pleasantly but when I hold myself far off in the horizon. And the
soul dilutes the body and makes it passable. My soul and body have
tottered along together of late, tripping and hindering one another like
unpracticed Siamese twins. They two should walk as one, that no obstacle
may be nearer than the firmament.

       *       *       *       *       *

There must be some narrowness in the soul that compels one to have
secrets.


_Feb. 23. Wednesday._ Every poet's muse is circumscribed in her
wanderings, and may be well said to haunt some favorite spring or
mountain. Chaucer seems to have been the poet of gardens. He has hardly
left a poem in which some retired and luxurious retreat of the kind is
not described, to which he gains access by some secret port, and there,
by some fount or grove, is found his hero and the scene of his tale. It
seems as if, by letting his imagination riot in the matchless beauty
of an ideal garden, he thus fed [_sic_] his fancy on to the invention
of a tale which would fit the scene. The muse of the most universal
poet retires into some familiar nook, whence it spies out the land as
the eagle from his eyrie, for he who sees so far over plain and forest
is perched in a narrow cleft of the crag. Such pure childlike love of
Nature is nowhere to be matched.[339] And it is not strange that the
poetry of so rude an age should contain such polished praise of Nature;
for the charms of Nature are not enhanced by civilization, as society
is, but she possesses a permanent refinement, which at last subdues and
educates men.

The reader has great confidence in Chaucer. He tells no lies. You read
his story with a smile, as if it were the circumlocution of a child,
and yet you find that he has spoke with more directness and economy of
words than a sage. He is never heartless. So new was all his theme in
those days, that [he] had not to invent, but only to tell.[340]

The language of poetry is _infantile_. It cannot talk.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is the charm and greatness of all society, from friendship to the
drawing-room, that it takes place on a level slightly higher than the
actual characters of the parties would warrant;[341] it is an expression
of faith. True politeness is only hope and trust in men. It never
addresses a fallen or falling man, but salutes a rising generation. It
does not flatter, but only congratulates. The rays of light come to us
in such a curve that every fellow in the street appears higher than he
really is. It is the innate civility of nature.[342]

       *       *       *       *       *

I am glad that it was so because it could be.


_March 1._ Whatever I learn from any circumstances, that especially I
needed to know. Events come out of God, and our characters determine
them and constrain fate, as much as they determine the words and tone
of a friend to us. Hence are they always acceptable as experience, and
we do not see how we could have done without them.


_March 2._ The greatest impression of character is made by that
person who consents to have no character. He who sympathizes with and
runs through the whole circle of attributes cannot afford to be an
individual. Most men stand pledged to themselves, so that their narrow
and confined virtue has no suppleness. They are like children who cannot
walk in bad company and learn the lesson which even it teaches, without
their guardians, for fear of contamination. He is a fortunate man who
gets through the world without being burthened by a name and reputation,
for they are at any rate but his past history and no prophecy, and as
such concern him no more than another. Character is Genius settled. It
can maintain itself against the world, and if it relapses it repents.
It is as a dog set to watch the property of Genius. Genius, strictly
speaking, is not responsible, for it is not moral.


_March 8._ I live in the perpetual verdure of the globe. I die in the
annual decay of nature.

We can understand the phenomenon of death in the animal better if we
first consider it in the order next below us, the vegetable.

The death of the flea and the elephant are but phenomena of the life of
nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

Most lecturers preface their discourses on music with a history of
music, but as well introduce an essay on virtue with a history of
virtue.[343] As if the possible combinations of sound, the last wind
that sighed, or melody that waked the wood, had any history other than
a perceptive ear might hear in the least and latest sound of nature!
A history of music would be like the history of the future; for so
little past is it, and capable of record, that it is but the hint of a
prophecy. It is the history of gravitation. It has no history more than
God. It circulates and resounds forever, and only flows like the sea
or air. There might be a history of men or of hearing, but not of the
unheard. Why, if I should sit down to write its story, the west wind
would rise to refute me. Properly speaking, there can be no history but
natural history, for there is no past in the soul but in nature. So that
the history of anything is only the true account of it, which will be
always the same. I might as well write the history of my aspirations.
Does not the last and highest contain them all? Do the lives of the
great composers contain the facts which interested them? What is this
music? Why, thinner and more evanescent than ether; subtler than sound,
for it is only a disposition of sound. It is to sound what color is to
matter. It is the color of a flame, or of the rainbow, or of water. Only
one sense has known it. The least profitable, the least tangible fact,
which cannot be bought or cultivated but by virtuous methods, and yet
our ears ring with it like shells left on the shore.


_March 11. Friday._ Chaucer's familiar, but innocent, way of speaking of
God is of a piece with his character. He comes readily to his thoughts
without any false reverence. If Nature is our mother, is not God much
more? God should come into our thoughts with no more parade than the
zephyr into our ears. Only strangers approach him with ceremony. How
rarely in our English tongue do we find expressed any affection for
God! No sentiment is so rare as love of God,—universal love. Herbert
is almost the only exception. "Ah, my dear God," etc. Chaucer's was a
remarkably affectionate genius. There is less love and simple trust in
Shakespeare. When he sees a beautiful person or object, he almost takes
a pride in the "maistry" of his God.[344] The Protestant Church seems to
have nothing to supply the place of the Saints of the Catholic calendar,
who were at least channels for the affections. Its God has perhaps too
many of the attributes of a Scandinavian deity.

       *       *       *       *       *

We can only live healthily the life the gods assign us. I must receive
my life as passively as the willow leaf that flutters over the brook. I
must not be for myself, but God's work, and that is always good. I will
wait the breezes patiently, and grow as Nature shall determine. My fate
cannot but be grand so. We may live the life of a plant or an animal,
without living an animal life. This constant and universal content of
the animal comes of resting quietly in God's palm. I feel as if [I]
could at any time resign my life and the responsibility of living into
God's hands, and become as innocent, free from care, as a plant or
stone.

My life, my life! why will you linger? Are the years short and the
months of no account? How often has long delay quenched my aspirations!
Can God afford that I should forget him? Is he so indifferent to my
career? Can heaven be postponed with no more ado? Why were my ears given
to hear those everlasting strains which haunt my life, and yet to be
prophaned much more by these perpetual dull sounds?

       *       *       *       *       *

Our doubts are so musical that they persuade themselves.

Why, God, did you include me in your great scheme? Will you not make me
a partner at last? Did it need there should be a conscious material?

       *       *       *       *       *

My friend, my friend, I'd speak so frank to thee that thou wouldst pray
me to keep back some part, for fear I robbed myself. To address thee
delights me, there is such cleanness in the delivery. I am delivered of
my tale, which, told to strangers, still would linger on my lips as if
untold, or doubtful how it ran.


_March 12._ Consider what a difference there is between living and
dying. To die is not to _begin_ to die, and _continue_; it is not a
state of continuance, but of transientness; but to live is a condition
of continuance, and does not mean to be born merely. There is no
continuance of death. It is a transient phenomenon. Nature presents
nothing in a state of death.


_March 13. Sunday._ The sad memory of departed friends is soon incrusted
over with sublime and pleasing thoughts, as their monuments are
overgrown with moss.[345] Nature doth thus kindly heal every wound. By
the mediation of a thousand little mosses and fungi, the most unsightly
objects become radiant of beauty. There seem to be two sides to this
world, presented us at different times, as we see things in growth or
dissolution, in life or death. For seen with the eye of a poet, as God
sees them, all are alive and beautiful; but seen with the historical
eye, or the eye of the memory, they are dead and offensive. If we see
Nature as pausing, immediately all mortifies and decays; but seen as
progressing, she is beautiful.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am startled that God can make me so rich even with my own cheap
stores. It needs but a few wisps of straw in the sun, or some small word
dropped, or that has long lain silent in some book. When heaven begins
and the dead arise, no trumpet is blown; perhaps the south wind will
blow. What if you or I be dead! God is alive still.


_March 14._ Chaucer's genius does not soar like Milton's, but is
genial and familiar. It is only a greater portion of humanity, with
all its weakness. It is not heroic, as Raleigh, or pious, as Herbert,
or philosophical, as Shakespeare, but the child of the English nation,
but that child that is "father of the man." His genius is only for the
most part an exceeding naturalness. It is perfect sincerity, though with
the behavior of a child rather than of a man.[346] He can complain, as
in the "Testament of Love," but yet so truly and unfeignedly that his
complaint does not fail to interest. All England has his case at heart.

He shows great tenderness and delicacy, but not the heroic sentiment.
His genius was feminine, not masculine,—not but such is rarest to find
in woman (though the appreciation of it is not),—but less manly than
the manliest.[347]

       *       *       *       *       *

It is not easy to find one brave enough to play the game of love quite
alone with you, but they must get some third person, or world, to
countenance them. They thrust others between. Love is so delicate and
fastidious that I see not how [it] can ever begin. Do you expect me to
love with you, unless you make my love secondary to nothing else? Your
words come tainted, if the thought of the world darted between thee and
the thought of me. You are not venturous enough for love. It goes alone
unscared through wildernesses.

As soon as I see people loving what they see merely, and not their own
high hopes that they form of others, I pity, and do not want their love.
Such love delays me. Did I ask thee to love me who hate myself? No! Love
that I love, and I will love thee that lovest it.

The love is faint-hearted and short-lived that is contented with the
past history of its object. It does not prepare the soil to bear new
crops lustier than the old.

"I would I had leisure for these things," sighs the world. "When I have
done my quilting and baking, then I will not be backward."

Love never stands still, nor does its object. It is the revolving sun
and the swelling bud. If I know what I love, it is because I _remember_
it.

Life is grand, and so are its environments of Past and Future. Would
the face of nature be so serene and beautiful if man's destiny were not
equally so? What am I good for now, who am still marching after high
things, but to hear and tell the news, to bring wood and water, and
count how many eggs the hens lay? In the meanwhile, I expect my life
will begin. I will not aspire longer. I will see what it is I would be
after. I will be unanimous.


_March 15. Tuesday._ It is a new day; the sun shines. The poor have
come out to employ themselves in the sunshine, the old and feeble to
scent the air once more. I hear the bluebird and the song sparrow and
the robin, and the note of the lark leaks up through the meadows, as if
its bill had been thawed by the warm sun.

As I am going to the woods I think to take some small book in my pocket
whose author has been there already, whose pages will be as good as my
thoughts, and will eke them out or show me human life still gleaming in
the horizon when the woods have shut out the town. But I can find none.
None will sail as far forward into the bay of nature as my thought.
They stay at home. I would go home. When I get to the wood their thin
leaves rustle in my fingers. They are bare and obvious, and there is no
halo or haze about them. Nature lies far and fair behind them all.[348]
I should like to meet the great and serene sentence, which does not
reveal itself,—only that it is great,—which I may never with my utmost
intelligence pierce through and beyond (more than the earth itself),
which no intelligence can understand. There should be a kind of life
and palpitation to it; under its rind a kind of blood should circulate
forever, communicating freshness to its countenance.[349]

       *       *       *       *       *

Cold Spring.—I hear nothing but a phœbe, and the wind, and the rattling
of a chaise in the wood. For a few years I stay here, not knowing,
taking my own life by degrees, and then I go. I hear a spring bubbling
near, where I drank out of a can in my earliest youth. The birds, the
squirrels, the alders, the pines, they seem serene and in their places.
I wonder if my life looks as serene to them too. Does no creature, then,
see with the eyes of its own narrow destiny, but with God's? When God
made man, he reserved some parts and some rights to himself. The eye has
many qualities which belong to God more than man. It is his lightning
which flashes in it. When I look into my companion's eye, I think it is
God's private mine. It is a noble feature; it cannot be degraded; for
God can look on all things undefiled.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pond.—Nature is constantly original and inventing new patterns, like a
mechanic in his shop. When the overhanging pine drops into the water, by
the action of the sun, and the wind rubbing it on the shore, its boughs
are worn white and smooth and assume fantastic forms, as if turned by a
lathe.[350] All things, indeed, are subjected to a rotary motion, either
gradual and partial or rapid and complete, from the planet and system
to the simplest shellfish and pebbles on the beach; as if all beauty
resulted from an object turning on its own axis, or others turning
about it. It establishes a new centre in the universe. As all curves
have reference to their centres or foci, so all beauty of character
has reference to the soul, and is a graceful gesture of recognition or
waving of the body toward it.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great and solitary heart will love alone, without the knowledge of
its object. It cannot have society in its love. It will expend its love
as the cloud drops rain upon the fields over which [it] floats.

The only way to speak the truth is to speak lovingly; only the lover's
words are heard. The intellect should never speak; it is not a natural
sound. How trivial the best actions are! I am led about from sunrise to
sunset by an ignoble routine, and yet can find no better road. I must
make a part of the planet. I must obey the law of nature.


_March 16. Wednesday._ Raleigh's Maxims are not true and impartial, but
yet are expressed with a certain magnanimity, which was natural to the
man, as if this selfish policy could easily afford to give place in him
to a more human and generous. He gives such advice that we have more
faith in his conduct than his principles.

He seems to have carried the courtier's life to the highest pitch of
magnanimity and grace it was capable of. He is liberal and generous
as a prince,—that is, within bounds; brave, chivalrous, heroic, as the
knight in armor and not as a defenseless man. His was not the heroism of
Luther, but of Bayard. There was more of grace than of truth in it. He
had more taste than character. There may be something petty in a refined
taste; it easily degenerates into effeminacy; it does not consider the
broadest use. It is not content with simple good and bad, and so is
fastidious and curious, or nice only.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most attractive sentences are not perhaps the wisest, but the surest
and soundest. He who uttered them had a right to speak. He did not stand
on a rolling stone, but was well assured of his footing, and naturally
breathed them without effort. They were spoken in the nick of time.
With rare fullness were they spoken, as a flower expands in the field;
and if you dispute their doctrine, you will say, "But there is truth
in their assurance." Raleigh's are of this nature, spoken with entire
satisfaction and heartiness. They are not philosophy, but poetry.

With him it was always well done and nobly said.

That is very true which Raleigh says about the equal necessity of
war and law,—that "the necessity of war, which among human actions
is most lawless, hath some kind of affinity and near resemblance with
the necessity of law;" for both equally rest on force as their basis,
and war is only the resource of law, either on a smaller or larger
scale,—its authority asserted. In war, in some sense, lies the very
genius of law. It is law creative and active; it is the first principle
of the law. What is human warfare but just this,—an effort to make the
laws of God and nature take sides with one party. Men make an arbitrary
code, and, because it is not right, they try to make it prevail by
might. The moral law does not want any champion. Its asserters do not
go to war. It was never infringed with impunity. It is inconsistent to
decry war and maintain law, for if there were no need of war there would
be no need of law.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must confess I see no resource but to conclude that conscience was not
given us to no purpose, or for a hindrance, but that, however flattering
order and expediency may look, it is but the repose of a lethargy; and
we will choose rather to be awake, though it be stormy, and maintain
ourselves on this earth and in this life as we may, without signing our
death-warrant in the outset. What does the law protect? My rights? or
any rights? My right, or the right? If I avail myself of it, it may help
my sin; it cannot help my virtue. Let us see if we cannot stay here,
where God has put us, on his own conditions. Does not his law reach
to the earth? While the law holds fast the thief and murderer for my
protection (I should say its own), it lets itself go loose. Expediencies
differ. They may clash. English law may go to war with American law,
that is English interest with American interest, but what is expedient
for the whole world will be absolute right, and synonymous with the law
of God. So the law is only partial right. It is selfish, and consults
for the interest of the few.[351]

Somehow, strangely, the vice of men gets well represented and protected,
but their virtue has none to plead its cause, nor any charter of
immunities and rights. The Magna Charta is not chartered rights, but
chartered wrongs.


_March 17. Thursday._ I have been making pencils all day, and then at
evening walked to see an old schoolmate who is going to help make the
Welland Canal navigable for ships round Niagara. He cannot see any
such motives and modes of living as I; professes not to look beyond
the securing of certain "creature comforts." And so we go silently
different ways, with all serenity, I in the still moonlight through the
village this fair evening to write these thoughts in my journal, and he,
forsooth, to mature his schemes to ends as good, maybe, but different.
So are we two made, while the same stars shine quietly over us. If I or
he be wrong, Nature yet consents placidly. She bites her lip and smiles
to see how her children will agree. So does the Welland Canal get built,
and other conveniences, while I live. Well and good, I must confess.
Fast sailing ships are hence not detained.

What means this changing sky, that now I freeze and contract and go
within myself to warm me, and now I say it is a south wind, and go all
soft and warm along the way? I sometimes wonder if I do not breathe the
south wind.


_March 18. Friday._ Whatever book or sentence will bear to be read
twice, we may be sure was thought twice. I say this thinking of Carlyle,
who writes pictures or first impressions merely, which consequently
will only bear a first reading. As if any transient, any _new_, mood of
the best man deserved to detain the world long. I should call Carlyle's
writing essentially dramatic, excellent acting, entertaining especially
to those who see rather than those who hear, not to be repeated more
than a joke. If he did not think who made the joke, how shall we think
who hear it? He never consults the oracle, but thinks to utter oracles
himself. There is nothing in his books for which he is not, and does
not feel, responsible. He does not retire behind the truth he utters,
but stands in the foreground. I wish he would just think, and tell
me what he thinks, appear to me in the attitude of a man with his ear
inclined, who comes as silently and meekly as the morning star, which
is unconscious of the dawn it heralds, leading the way up the steep as
though alone and unobserved in its observing, without looking behind.
He is essentially a humorist. But humors will not feed a man; they are
the least satisfactory morsel to the healthy appetite. They circulate;
I want rather to meet that about which they circulate. The heart is not
a humor, nor do they go to the heart, as the blood does.[352]


_March 19. Saturday_. When I walk in the fields of Concord and meditate
on the destiny of this prosperous slip of the Saxon family, the
unexhausted energies of this new country, I forget that this which is
now Concord was once Musketaquid, and that the _American race_ has had
its destiny also. Everywhere in the fields, in the corn and grain land,
the earth is strewn with the relics of a race which has vanished as
completely as if trodden in with the earth. I find it good to remember
the eternity behind me as well as the eternity before. Wherever I go, I
tread in the tracks of the Indian. I pick up the bolt which he has but
just dropped at my feet. And if I consider destiny I am on his trail. I
scatter his hearthstones with my feet, and pick out of the embers of his
fire the simple but enduring implements of the wigwam and the chase. In
planting my corn in the same furrow which yielded its increase to his
support so long, I displace some memorial of him.

I have been walking this afternoon over a pleasant field planted with
winter rye, near the house, where this strange people once had their
dwelling-place. Another species of mortal men, but little less wild to
me than the musquash they hunted. Strange spirits, dæmons, whose eyes
could never meet mine; with another nature and another fate than mine.
The crows flew over the edge of the woods, and, wheeling over my head,
seemed to rebuke, as dark-winged spirits more akin to the Indian than
I. Perhaps only the present disguise of the Indian. If the new has a
meaning, so has the old.[353]

Nature has her russet hues as well as green. Indeed, our eye splits
on every object, and we can as well take one path as the other. If I
consider its history, it is old; if its destiny, it is new. I may see
a part of an object, or the whole. I will not be imposed on and think
Nature is old because the season is advanced. I will study the botany of
the mosses and fungi on the decayed [wood], and remember that decayed
wood is not old, but has just begun to be what it is. I need not think
of the pine almond[354] or the acorn and sapling when I meet the fallen
pine or oak, more than of the generations of pines and oaks which have
fed the young tree. The new blade of the corn, the third leaf of the
melon, these are not green but gray with time, but sere in respect of
time.

The pines and the crows are not changed, but instead that Philip and
Paugus stand on the plain, here are Webster and Crockett. Instead of the
council-house is the legislature. What a new aspect have new eyes given
to the land! Where is this country but in the hearts of its inhabitants?
Why, there is only so much of Indian America left as there is of the
American Indian in the character of this generation.

       *       *       *       *       *

A blithe west wind is blowing over all. In the fine flowing haze, men
at a distance seem shadowy and gigantic, as ill-defined and great as
men should always be. I do not know if yonder be a man or a ghost.

       *       *       *       *       *

What a consolation are the stars to man!—so high and out of his reach,
as is his own destiny. I do not know but my life is fated to be thus low
and grovelling always. I cannot discover its use even to myself. But it
is permitted to see those stars in the sky equally useless, yet highest
of all and deserving of a fair destiny. My fate is in some sense linked
with that of the stars, and if they are to persevere to a great end,
shall I die who could conjecture it? It surely is some encouragement
to know that the stars are my fellow-creatures, for I do not suspect
but they are reserved for a high destiny. Has not he who discovers and
names a planet in the heavens as long a year as it? I do not fear that
any misadventure will befall _them_. Shall I not be content to disappear
with the missing stars? Do I mourn their fate?

Man's moral nature is a riddle which only eternity can solve.

       *       *       *       *       *

I see laws which never fail, of whose failure I never conceived. Indeed
I cannot detect failure anywhere but in my fear. I do not fear that
right is not right, that good is not good, but only the annihilation of
the present existence. But only that can make me incapable of fear. My
fears are as good prophets as my hopes.


_March 20. Sunday_. My friend is cold and reserved because his love
for me is waxing and not waning. These are the early processes; the
particles are just beginning to shoot in crystals. If the mountains
came to me, I should no longer go to the mountains. So soon as that
consummation takes place which I wish, it will be past. Shall I not have
a friend in reserve? Heaven is to come. I hope this is not it.

Words should pass between friends as the lightning passes from cloud
to cloud. I don't know how much I assist in the economy of nature when
I declare a fact. Is it not an important part in the history of the
flower that I tell my friend where I found it? We do [not] wish friends
to feed and clothe our bodies,—neighbors are kind enough for that,—but
to do the like offices to ourselves.[355] We wish to spread and publish
ourselves, as the sun spreads its rays; and we toss the new thought
to the friend, and thus it is dispersed. Friends are those twain who
feel their interests to be one. Each knows that the other might as well
have said what he said. All beauty, all music, all delight springs from
apparent dualism but real unity. My friend is my real brother. I see his
nature groping yonder like my own. Does there go one whom I know? then
I go there.

The field where friends have met is consecrated forever. Man seeks
friendship out of the desire to realize a home here. As the Indian
thinks he receives into himself the courage and strength of his
conquered enemy, so we add to ourselves all the character and heart of
our friends. He is my creation. I can do what I will with him. There
is no possibility of being thwarted; the friend is like wax in the rays
that fall from our own hearts.

The friend does not take my word for anything, but he takes me. He
trusts me as I trust myself. We only need be as true to others as we
are to ourselves, that there may be ground enough for friendship. In
the beginnings of friendship,—for it does not grow,—we realize such love
and justice as are attributed to God.

Very few are they from whom we derive any _in_formation. The most only
announce and tell tales, but the friend _in_-forms.

What is all nature and human life at this moment, what the scenery and
vicinity of a human soul, but the song of an early sparrow from yonder
fences, and the cackling hens in the barn? So for one while my destiny
loiters within ear-shot of these sounds. The great busy Dame Nature is
concerned to know how many eggs her hens lay. The Soul, the proprietor
of the world, has an interest in the stacking of hay, the foddering
of cattle, and the draining of peat meadows. Away in Scythia, away in
India, they make butter and cheese for its larder.[356] I wish that in
some page of the Testament there were something like Charlemagne's egg
account. Was not Christ interested in the setting hens of Palestine?

Nature is very ample and roomy. She has left us plenty of space to
move in. As far as I can see from this window, how little life in the
landscape! The few birds that flit past do not crowd; they do not fill
the valley. The traveller on the highway has no fellow-traveller for
miles before or behind him. Nature was generous and not niggardly,
certainly.

       *       *       *       *       *

How simple is the natural connection of events. We complain greatly of
the want of flow and sequence in books, but if the journalist only move
himself from Boston to New York, and speak as before, there is link
enough. And so there would be, if he were as careless of connection
and order when he stayed at home, and let the incessant progress which
his life makes be the apology for abruptness. Do I not travel as far
away from my old resorts, though I stay here at home, as though I were
on board the steamboat? Is not my life riveted together? Has not it
sequence? Do not my breathings follow each other naturally?


_March 21._[357] Who is old enough to have learned from experience?


_March 22. Tuesday._ Nothing can be more useful to a man than a
determination not to be hurried.

I have not succeeded if I have an antagonist who fails. It must be
humanity's success.

I cannot think nor utter my thought unless I have infinite room. The
cope of heaven is not too high, the sea is not too deep, for him who
would unfold a great thought. It must feed me and warm and clothe me.
It must be an entertainment to which my whole nature is invited. I must
know that the gods are to be my fellow-guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

We cannot well do without our sins; they are the highway of our virtue.


_March 23. Wednesday._ Plain speech is always a desideratum. Men write
in a florid style only because they would match the simple beauties of
the plainest speech. They prefer to be misunderstood, rather than come
short of its exuberance. Hussein Effendi praises the epistolary style of
Ibrahim Pasha to the French traveller Botta, because of "the difficulty
of understanding it: there was, he said, but one person at Jidda who was
capable of understanding and explaining the Pasha's correspondence."
A plain sentence, where every word is rooted in the soil, is indeed
flowery and verdurous. It has the beauty and variety of mosaic with the
strength and compactness of masonry. All fullness looks like exuberance.
We are not rich without superfluous wealth; but the imitator only copies
the superfluity. If the words were sufficiently simple and answering to
the thing to be expressed, our sentences would be as blooming as wreaths
of evergreen and flowers.[358] You cannot fill a wine-glass quite to
the brim without heaping it. Simplicity is exuberant.

When I look back eastward over the world, it seems to be all in repose.
Arabia, Persia, Hindostan are the land of contemplation. Those Eastern
nations have perfected the luxury of idleness. Mount Sabér, according
to the French traveller and naturalist Botta, is celebrated for
producing the Kát tree. "The soft tops of the twigs and tender leaves
are eaten," says his reviewer, "and produce an agreeable soothing
excitement, restoring from fatigue, banishing sleep, and disposing to
the enjoyment of conversation." What could be more dignified than to
browse the tree-tops with the camelopard? Who would not be a rabbit or
partridge sometimes, to chew mallows and pick the apple tree buds? It
is not hard to discover an instinct for the opium and betel and tobacco
chewers.[359]

       *       *       *       *       *

After all, I believe it is the style of thought entirely, and not the
style of expression, which makes the difference in books. For if I find
any thought worth extracting, I do not wish to alter the language. Then
the author seems to have had all the graces of eloquence and poetry
given him.

I am pleased to discover myself as much a pensioner in Nature as moles
and titmice. In some very direct and simple uses to which man puts
Nature he stands in this relation to her. Oriental life does not want
this grandeur. It is in Sadi and the Arabian Nights and the Fables of
Pilpay. In the New England noontide I have discovered more materials
of Oriental history than the Sanskrit contains or Sir W. Jones has
unlocked. I see why it is necessary there should be such history at
all. Was not Asia mapped in my brain before it was in any geography? In
my brain is the Sanskrit which contains the history of the primitive
times. The Vedas and their Angas are not so ancient as my serenest
contemplations.[360] My mind contemplates them, as Brahma his scribe.

       *       *       *       *       *

I occasionally find myself to be nothing at all, because the gods give
me nothing to do. I cannot brag; I can only congratulate my masters.

In idleness I am of no thickness, I am thinnest wafer. I never compass
my own ends. God schemes for me.

We have our times of action and our times of reflection. The one mood
caters for the other. Now I am Alexander, and then I am Homer. One while
my hand is impatient to handle an axe or hoe, and at another to [_sic_]
pen. I am sure I write the tougher truth for these calluses on my palms.
They give firmness to the sentence. The sentences of a laboring man are
like hardened thongs, or the sinews of the deer, or the roots of the
pine.[361]


_March 24. Thursday._ Those authors are successful who do not _write
down_ to others, but make their own taste and judgment their audience.
By some strange infatuation we forget that we do not approve what yet
we recommend to others. It is enough if I please myself with writing;
I am then sure of an audience.

       *       *       *       *       *

If hoarded treasures can make me rich, have I not the wealth of the
planet in my mines and at the bottom of the sea?

       *       *       *       *       *

It is always singular to meet common sense in very old books, as the
Veeshnoo Sarma,—as if they could have dispensed with the experience of
later times.[362] We had not given space enough to _their_ antiquity
for the accumulation of wisdom. We meet even a trivial wisdom in them,
as if truth were already hackneyed. The present is always younger than
antiquity. A playful wisdom, which has eyes behind as well as before and
oversees itself. This pledge of sanity cannot be spared in a book, that
it sometimes reflect upon itself, that it pleasantly behold itself, that
it hold the scales over itself.[363] The wise can afford to doubt in
his wisest moment. The easiness of doubt is the ground of his assurance.
Faith keeps many doubts in her pay. If I could not doubt, I should not
believe.

It is seen in this old scripture how wisdom is older than the talent
of composition. It is a simple and not a compound rock. The story is
as slender as the thread on which pearls are strung; it is a spiral
line, growing more and more perplexed till it winds itself up and dies
like the silkworm in its cocoon. It is an interminable labyrinth. It
seems as if the old philosopher could not talk without moving, and each
motion were made the apology or occasion for a sentence, but, this being
found inconvenient, the fictitious progress of the tale was invented.
The story which winds between and around these sentences, these barrows
in the desert, these oases, is as indistinct as a camel track between
Mourzuk and Darfur, between the Pyramids and the Nile, from Gaza to
Jaffa.[364]

The great thoughts of a wise man seem to the vulgar who do not
generalize to stand far apart like isolated mounts; but science knows
that the mountains which rise so solitary in our midst are parts of a
great mountain-chain, dividing the earth, and the eye that looks into
the horizon toward the blue Sierra melting away in the distance may
detect their flow of thought. These sentences which take up your common
life so easily are not seen to run into ridges, because they are the
table-land on which the spectator stands.[365] I do not require that
the mountain-peaks be chained together, but by the common basis on
which they stand, nor that the path of the muleteer be kept open at so
much pains, when they may be bridged by the Milky Way. That they stand
frowning upon one another, or mutually reflecting the sun's rays, is
proof enough of their common basis.

       *       *       *       *       *

The book should be found where the sentence is, and its connection be
as inartificial. It is the inspiration of a day and not of a moment.
The links should be gold also. Better that the good be not united than
that a bad man be admitted into their society. When men can select they
will. If there be any stone in the quarry better than the rest, they
will forsake the rest because of it. Only the good will be quarried.

In these fables the story goes unregarded, while the reader leaps from
sentence to sentence, as the traveller leaps from stone to stone while
the water rushes unheeded between them.[366]


_March 25. Friday._ Great persons are not soon learned, not even their
outlines, but they change like the mountains in the horizon as we ride
along.

       *       *       *       *       *

A man's life should be as fresh as a river. It should be the same
channel, but a new water every instant.[367] Some men have no
inclination; they have no rapids nor cascades, but marshes, and
alligators, and miasma instead.[368]

How insufficient is all wisdom without love! There may be courtesy,
there may be good will, there may be even temper, there may be wit,
and talent, and sparkling conversation,—and yet the soul pine for
life. Just so sacred and rich as my life is to myself will it be to
another. Ignorance and bungling with love are better than wisdom and
skill without. Our life without love is like coke and ashes,—like the
cocoanut in which the milk is dried up. I want to see the sweet sap
of living wood in it. Men may be pure as alabaster and Parian marble,
elegant as a Tuscan villa, sublime as Terni, but if they are not in
society as retiring and inexperienced as children, we shall go join
Alaric and the Goths and Vandals. There is no milk mixed with the wine
at the entertainment.[369]

Enthusiasm which is the formless material of thought. Comparatively
speaking, I care not for the man or his designs who would make the
highest use of me short of an all-adventuring friendship. I wish by the
behavior of my friend toward me to be led to have such regard for myself
as for a box of precious ointment. I shall not be so cheap to myself if
I see that another values me.

We talk much about education, and yet none will assume the office of an
educator. I never gave any one the whole advantage of myself. I never
afforded him the culture of my love. How can I talk of charity, who at
last withhold the kindness which alone makes charity desirable? The poor
want nothing less than me myself, and I shirk charity by giving rags
and meat.

Very dangerous is the talent of composition, the striking out the heart
of life at a blow, as the Indian takes off a scalp. I feel as if my life
had grown more outward since I could express it.[370]

What can I give or what deny to another but myself?

The stars are God's dreams, thoughts remembered in the silence of his
night.

In company, that person who alone can understand you you cannot get out
of your mind.

The artist must work with indifferency. Too great interest vitiates his
work.


_March 26. Saturday._ The wise will not be imposed on by wisdom. You
can tell, but what do you know?

I thank God that the cheapness which appears in time and the world,
the trivialness of the whole scheme of things, is in my own cheap and
trivial moment. I am time and the world. I assert no independence. In me
are summer and winter, village life and commercial routine, pestilence
and famine and refreshing breezes, joy and sadness, life and death.
How near is yesterday! How far to-morrow! I have seen nails which were
driven before I was born. Why do they look old and rusty? Why does not
God make some mistake to show to us that time is a delusion? Why did I
invent time but to destroy it?

Did you ever remember the moment when you were not mean?

Is it not a satire to say that life is organic?

Where is my heart gone? They say men cannot part with it and live.

       *       *       *       *       *

Are setting hens troubled with ennui? Nature is very kind; does she let
them reflect? These long March days, setting on and on in the crevice
of a hayloft, with no active employment![371] Do setting hens sleep?

       *       *       *       *       *

A book should be a vein of gold ore, as the sentence is a diamond found
in the sand, or a pearl fished out of the sea.

He who does not borrow trouble does not lend it.

I must confess I have felt mean enough when asked how I was to act
on society, what errand I had to mankind. Undoubtedly I did not feel
mean without a reason, and yet my loitering is not without defense. I
would fain communicate the wealth of my life to men, would really give
them what is most precious in my gift. I would secrete pearls with the
shellfish and lay up honey with the bees for them. I will sift the
sunbeams for the public good. I know no riches I would keep back. I
have no private good, unless it be my peculiar ability to serve the
public. This is the only individual property. Each one may thus be
innocently rich. I inclose and foster the pearl till it is grown. I wish
to communicate those parts of my life which I would gladly live again
myself.

It is hard to be a good citizen of the world in any great sense; but if
we do render no interest or increase to mankind out of that talent God
gave us, we can at least preserve the principle unimpaired. One would
like to be making large dividends to society out [of] that deposited
capital in us, but he does well for the most part if he proves a secure
investment only, without adding to the stock.

In such a letter as I like there will be the most naked and direct
speech, the least circumlocution.


_March 27. Sunday._ The eye must be firmly anchored to this earth which
beholds birches and pines waving in the breeze in a certain fight, a
serene rippling light.

       *       *       *       *       *

Cliffs.—Two little hawks have just come out to play, like butterflies
rising one above the other in endless alternation far below me. They
swoop from side to side in the broad basin of the tree-tops, with wider
and wider surges, as if swung by an invisible pendulum. They stoop down
on this side and scale up on that.

Suddenly I look up and see a new bird, probably an eagle, quite above
me, laboring with the wind not more than forty rods off. It was the
largest bird of the falcon kind I ever saw. I was never so impressed by
any flight. She sailed the air, and fell back from time to time like a
ship on her beam ends, holding her talons up as if ready for the arrows.
I never allowed before for the grotesque attitudes of our national
bird.[372]

The eagle must have an educated eye.

See what a life the gods have given us, set round with pain and
pleasure. It is too strange for sorrow; it is too strange for joy. One
while it looks as shallow, though as intricate, as a Cretan labyrinth,
and again it is a pathless depth. I ask for bread incessantly,—that my
life sustain me, as much as meat my body. No man knoweth in what hour
his life may come. Say not that Nature is trivial, for to-morrow she
will be radiant with beauty. I am as old—as old as the Alleghanies. I
was going to say Wachusett, but it excites a youthful feeling, as I were
but too happy to be so young.


_March 28. Monday._ How often must one feel, as he looks back on his
past life, that he has gained a talent but lost a character! My life
has got down into my fingers. My inspiration at length is only so much
breath as I can breathe.

Society affects to estimate men by their talents, but really feels and
knows them by their characters. What a man does, compared with what he
is, is but a small part. To require that our friend possess a certain
skill is not to be satisfied till he is something less than our friend.

Friendship should be a great promise, a perennial springtime.

I can conceive how the life of the gods may be dull and tame, if it is
not disappointed and insatiate.

       *       *       *       *       *

One may well feel chagrined when he finds he can do nearly all he can
conceive.

Some books ripple on like a stream, and we feel that the author is in
the full tide of discourse. Plato and Jamblichus and Pythagoras and
Bacon halt beside them. Long, stringy, slimy thoughts which flow or run
together. They read as if written for military men or men of business,
there is such a dispatch in them, and a double-quick time, a Saratoga
march with beat of drum. But the grave thinkers and philosophers seem
not to have got their swaddling-clothes off; they are slower than a
Roman army on its march, the rear encampment to-night where the van
camped last night. The wise Jamblichus eddies and gleams like a watery
slough.

But the reviewer seizes the pen and shouts, "Forward! Alamo and
Fanning!" and after rolls the tide of war. Immediately the author
discovers himself launched, and if the slope was easy and the grease
good, does not go to the bottom.

They flow as glibly as mill-streams sucking under a race-way. The flow
is ofttimes in the poor reader who makes such haste over their pages,
as to the traveller the walls and fences seem to travel. But the most
rapid trot is no flow after all.[373]

If I cannot chop wood in the yard, can I not chop wood in my journal?
Can I not give vent to that appetite so? I wish to relieve myself of
superfluous energy. How poor is the life of the best and wisest! The
petty side will appear at last. Understand once how the best in society
live,—with what routine, with what tedium and insipidity, with what
grimness and defiance, with what chuckling over an exaggeration of the
sunshine. Altogether, are not the actions of your great man poor, even
pitiful and ludicrous?

I am astonished, I must confess, that man looks so respectable in
nature, considering the littlenesses Socrates must descend to in the
twenty-four hours, that he yet wears a serene countenance and even
adorns nature.


_March 29. Tuesday._


_March 30. Wednesday._ Though Nature's laws are more immutable than any
despot's, yet to our daily life they rarely seem rigid, but we relax
with license in summer weather. We are not often nor harshly reminded
of the things we may not do. I am often astonished to see how long, and
with what manifold infringements of the natural laws, some men I meet
in the highway maintain life. She does not deny them quarter; they do
not die without priest. All the while she rejoices, for if they are not
one part of her they are another. I am convinced that consistency is the
secret of health. How many a poor man, striving to live a pure life,
pines and dies after a life of sickness, and his successors doubt if
Nature is not pitiless; while the confirmed and consistent sot, who is
content with his rank life like mushrooms, a mass of corruption, still
dozes comfortably under a hedge. He has made his peace with himself;
there is no strife. Nature is really very kind and liberal to all
persons of vicious habits. They take great licenses with her. She does
not exhaust them with many excesses.[374]

       *       *       *       *       *

How hard it is to be greatly related to mankind! They are only my uncles
and aunts and cousins. I hear of some persons greatly related, but
only he is so who has all mankind for his friend. Our intercourse with
the best grows soon shallow and trivial. They no longer inspire us.
After enthusiasm comes insipidity and blankness. The sap of all noble
schemes drieth up, and the schemers return again and again in despair
to "common sense and labor." If I could help infuse some life and heart
into society, should I not do a service? Why will not the gods mix a
little of the wine of nobleness with the air we drink? Let virtue have
some firm foothold in the earth. Where does she dwell? Who are the
salt of the earth? May not Love have some resting-place on the earth as
sure [as] the sunshine on the rock? The crystals imbedded in the cliff
sparkle and gleam from afar, as if they did certainly enrich our planet;
but where does any virtue permanently sparkle and gleam? She was sent
forth over the waste too soon, before the earth was prepared for her.

Rightfully we are to each other the gate of heaven and redeemers from
sin, but now we overlook these lowly and narrow ways. We will go over
the bald mountain-tops without going through the valleys.

       *       *       *       *       *

Men do not after all meet on the ground of their real acquaintance and
actual understanding of one another, but degrade themselves immediately
into the puppets of convention. They do as if, in given circumstances,
they had agreed to know each other only so well. They rarely get to that
[point] that they inform one another gratuitously, and use each other
like the sea and woods for what is new and inspiring there.

The best intercourse and communion they have is in silence above and
behind their speech. We should be very simple to rely on words. As
it is, what we knew before always interprets a man's words. I cannot
easily remember what any man has said, but how can I forget what he is
to me? We know each other better than we are aware; we are admitted to
startling privacies with every person we meet, and in some emergency we
shall find how well we knew him. To my solitary and distant thought my
neighbor is shorn of his halo, and is seen as privately and barely as
a star through a glass.


_March 31. Thursday._ I cannot forget the majesty of that bird at the
Cliff. It was no sloop or smaller craft hove in sight, but a ship of the
line, worthy to struggle with the elements. It was a great presence, as
of the master of river and forest. His eye would not have quailed before
the owner of the soil; none could challenge his rights. And then his
retreat, sailing so steadily away, was a kind of advance. How is it that
man always feels like an interloper in nature, as if he had intruded on
the domains of bird and beast?[375]

       *       *       *       *       *

The really efficient laborer will be found not to crowd his day with
work, but will saunter to his task surrounded by a wide halo of ease and
leisure. There will be a wide margin for relaxation to his day. He is
only earnest to secure the kernels of time, and does not exaggerate the
value of the husk. Why should the hen set all day? She can lay but one
egg, and besides she will not have picked up materials for a new one.
Those who work much do not work hard.[376]

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing is so rare as sense. Very uncommon sense is poetry, and has a
heroic or sweet music. But in verse, for the most part, the music now
runs before and then behind the sense, but is never coincident with it.
Given the metre, and one will make music while another makes sense. But
good verse, like a good soldier, will make its own music, and it will
march to the same with one consent. In most verse there is no inherent
music. The man should not march, but walk like a citizen. It is not time
of war but peace. Boys study the metres to write Latin verses, but it
does not help them to write English.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lydgate's "Story of Thebes," intended for a Canterbury Tale, is a
specimen of most unprogressive, unmusical verse. Each line rings the
knell of its brother, as if it were introduced but to dispose of him. No
mortal man could have breathed to that cadence without long intervals of
relaxation; the repetition would have been fatal to the lungs. No doubt
there was much healthy exercise taken in the meanwhile. He should forget
his rhyme and tell his story, or forget his story and breathe himself.

In Shakespeare and elsewhere the climax may be somewhere along the line,
which runs as varied and meandering as a country road, but in Lydgate
it is nowhere but in the rhyme. The couplets slope headlong to their
confluence.


_April 2. Saturday._[377] The Prologue to the Canterbury Tales is full
of good sense and humanity, but is not transcendent poetry. It is so
good that it seems like faultfinding to esteem it second to any other.
For picturesque description of persons it is without a parallel. It did
not need inspiration, but a cheerful and easy wit. It is essentially
humorous, as no inspired poetry is. Genius is so serious as to be grave
and sublime rather. Humor takes a narrower vision—however broad and
genial it may be—than enthusiasm. Humor delays and looks back.[378]


_April 3. Sunday._ I can remember when I was more enriched by a few
cheap rays of light falling on the pond-side than by this broad sunny
day. Riches have wings, indeed. The weight of present woe will express
the sweetness of past experience. When sorrow comes, how easy it is to
remember pleasure! When, in winter, the bees cannot make new honey, they
consume the old.

Experience is in the fingers and head. The heart is inexperienced.

Sorrow singeth the sweetest strain: "The Daughters of Zion," "The Last
Sigh of the Moor."

Joy is the nectar of flowers, sorrow the honey of bees.

I thank God for sorrow. It is hard to be abused. Is not He kind still,
who lets this south wind blow, this warm sun shine on me?

I have just heard the flicker among the oaks on the hillside ushering in
a new dynasty. It is the age and youth of time. Why did Nature set this
lure for sickly mortals? Eternity could not begin with more security and
momentousness than the spring. The summer's eternity is reëstablished by
this note.[379] All sights and sounds are seen and heard both in time
and eternity. And when the eternity of any sight or sound strikes the
eye or ear, they are intoxicated with delight.

Sometimes, as through a dim haze, we see objects in their eternal
relations; and they stand like Stonehenge and the Pyramids, and we
wonder who set them up and what for.

The destiny of the soul can never be studied by the reason, for its
modes are not ecstatic. In the wisest calculation or demonstration I
but play a game with myself. I am not to be taken captive by myself.

I cannot convince myself. God must convince. I can calculate a problem
in arithmetic, but not any morality.

Virtue is incalculable, as it is inestimable. Well, man's destiny is
but virtue, or manhood. It is wholly moral, to be learned only by the
life of the soul. God cannot calculate it. He has no moral philosophy,
no ethics. The reason, before it can be applied to such a subject, will
have to fetter and restrict it. How can he, step by step, perform that
long journey who has not conceived whither he is bound? How can he
expect to perform an arduous journey without interruption who has no
passport to the end?

On one side of man is the actual, and on the other the ideal. The former
is the province of the reason; it is even a divine light when directed
upon it, but it cannot reach forward into the ideal without blindness.
The moon was made to rule by night, but the sun to rule by day. Reason
will be but a pale cloud, like the moon, when one ray of divine light
comes to illumine the soul.

How rich and lavish must be the system which can afford to let so many
moons burn all the day as well as the night, though no man stands in
need of their light! There is none of that kind of economy in Nature
that husbands its stock, but she supplies inexhaustible means to the
most frugal methods. The poor may learn of her frugality, and the rich
generosity. Having carefully determined the extent of her charity,
she establishes it forever; her almsgiving is an annuity. She supplies
to the bee only so much wax as is necessary for its cell, so that no
poverty could stint it more; but the little economist which fed the
Evangelist in the desert still keeps in advance of the immigrant, and
fills the cavities of the forest for his repast.