Chapter VIII 1845-1847.

[The small and much mutilated journal which begins here appears to
belong to the Walden period (1845-47), but the entries are undated.]


THE HERO[444]

             What doth he ask?
             Some worthy task,
             Never to run
             Till that be done,
             That never done
             Under the sun.
             Here to begin
             All things to win
             By his endeavor
             Forever and ever.
             Happy and well
             On this ground to dwell,
             This soil subdue,
             Plant, and renew.
             By might and main
             Health and strength gain,
             So to give nerve
                     To his slenderness;
             Yet some mighty pain
             He would sustain,
             So to preserve
             His tenderness.
             Not be deceived,
             Of suff'ring bereaved,
             Not lose his life
             By living too well,
             Nor escape strife
             In his lonely cell,
             And so find out heaven
             By not knowing hell.
             Strength like the rock
             To withstand any shock,
             Yet some Aaron's rod,
             Some smiting by God,
             Occasion to gain
             To shed human tears
             And to entertain
             Still demonic fears.
     Not once for all, forever, blest,
     Still to be cheered out of the west;
     Not from his heart to banish all sighs;
     Still be encouraged by the sunrise;
     Forever to love and to love and to love,
     Within him, around him, beneath him, above.
     To love is to know, is to feel, is to be;
     At once 'tis his birth and his destiny.
             Having sold all,
             Something would get,
                     Furnish his stall
             With better yet,—
             For earthly pleasures
             Celestial pains,
             Heavenly losses
             For earthly gains.
             Still to begin—unheard-of sin
             A fallen angel—a risen man
             Never returns to where he began.
             Some childlike labor
             Here to perform,
             Some baby-house
             To keep out the storm,
             And make the sun laugh
             While he doth warm,
             And the moon cry
             To think of her youth,
             The months gone by,
             And wintering truth.

             How long to morning?
             Can any tell?
             How long since the warning
             On our ears fell?
             The bridegroom cometh
             Know we not well?
             Are we not ready,
             Our packet made,
             Our hearts steady,
             Last words said?
             Must we still eat
                     The bread we have spurned?
             Must we rekindle
             The faggots we've burned?
             Must we go out
             By the poor man's gate?
             Die by degrees,
             Not by new fate?
             Is there no road
             This way, my friend?
             Is there no road
             Without any end?
             Have you not seen
             In ancient times
             Pilgrims go by here
             Toward other climes,
             With shining faces
             Youthful and strong
             Mounting this hill
             With speech and with song?
             Oh, my good sir,
             I know not the ways;
             Little my knowledge,
             Though many my days.
             When I have slumbered,
             I have heard sounds
             As travellers passing
             Over my grounds.
             'Twas a sweet music
             Wafted them by;
             I could not tell
             If far off or nigh.
                     Unless I dreamed it,
             This was of yore,
             But I never told it
             To mortal before;
             Never remembered
             But in my dreams
             What to me waking
             A miracle seems.
     If you will give of your pulse or your grain,
     We will rekindle those flames again.
     Here will we tarry, still without doubt,
     Till a miracle putteth that fire out.

       *       *       *       *       *

     At midnight's hour I raised my head.
     The owls were seeking for their bread;
     The foxes barked, impatient still
     At their wan [?] fate they bear so ill.
     I thought me of eternities delayed
     And of commands but half obeyed.
     The night wind rustled through the glade,
     As if a force of men there staid;
     The word was whispered through the ranks,
     And every hero seized his lance.
     The word was whispered through the ranks,
           Advance!

To live to a good old age such as the ancients reached, serene and
contented, dignifying the life of man, leading a simple, epic country
life in these days of confusion and turmoil,—that is what Wordsworth
has done. Retaining the tastes and the innocence of his youth. There is
more wonderful talent, but nothing so cheering and world-famous as this.

The life of man would seem to be going all to wrack and pieces, and no
instance of permanence and the ancient natural health, notwithstanding
Burns, and Coleridge, and Carlyle. It will not do for men to die young;
the greatest genius does not die young. Whom the gods love most do
indeed die young, but not till their life is matured, and their years
are like those of the oak, for they are the products half of nature and
half of God. What should nature do without old men, not children but
men?

The life of men, not to become a mockery and a jest, should last a
respectable term of years. We cannot spare the age of those old Greek
Philosophers. They live long who do not live for a near end, who still
forever look to the immeasurable future for their manhood.

       *       *       *       *       *

All dramas have but one scene. There is but one stage for the peasant
and for the actor, and both on the farm and in the theatre the curtain
rises to reveal the same majestic scenery. The globe of earth is poised
in space for his stage under the foundations of the theatre, and the
cope of heaven, out of reach of the scene-shifter, overarches it. It
is always to be remembered by the critic that all actions are to be
regarded at last as performed from a distance upon some rood of earth
and amid the operations of nature.

Rabelais, too, inhabited the soil of France in sunshine and shade in
those years; and his life was no "farce" after all.

     I seek the present time,
     No other clime,
     Life in to-day,—
     Not to sail another way,—
     To Paris or to Rome,
     Or farther still from home.
     That man, whoe'er he is,
     Lives but a moral death
     Whose life is not coeval
     With his breath.
     My feet forever stand
     On Concord fields,
     And I must live the life
     Which their soil yields.
     What are deeds done
     Away from home?
     What the best essay
     On the Ruins of Rome?
     The love of the new,
     The unfathomed blue,
     The wind in the wood,
     All future good,
     The sunlit tree,
     The small chickadee,
     The dusty highways,
     What Scripture says,
     This pleasant weather,
     And all else together,
     The river's meander,
     All things, in short,
     Forbid me to wander
     In deed or in thought.
     In cold or in drouth,
     Not seek the sunny South,
     But make my whole tour
     In the sunny present hour.

     For here if thou fail,
     Where can'st thou prevail?
     If you love not
     Your own land most,
     You'll find nothing lovely
     On a distant coast.
     If you love not
     The latest sunset,
     What is there in pictures
     Or old gems set?
     If no man should travel
     Till he had the means,
     There'd be little travelling
     For kings or for queens.
     The means, what are they?
     They are the wherewithal
     Great expenses to pay,
     Life got, and some to spare,
     Great works on hand,
     And freedom from care,
     Plenty of time well spent
     To use,
     Clothes paid for and no rent
     In your shoes,
     Something to eat


     And something to burn,
     And above all no need to return.
     Then they who come back,
     Say, have they not failed,
     Wherever they've ridden,
     Or steamed it, or sailed?

     All your grass hay'd,
     All your debts paid,
     All your wills made;
     Then you might as well have stay'd,
     For are you not dead,
     Only not buried?

     The way unto "to-day,"
     The railroad to "here,"
     They never'll grade that way
     Nor shorten it, I fear.
     There are plenty of depots
     All the world o'er,
     But not a single station
     At a man's door.
     If he would get near
     To the secret of things,
     He'll not have to hear
     When the engine bell rings.

Exaggeration! was ever any virtue attributed to a man without
exaggeration? was ever any vice, without infinite exaggeration? Do
we not exaggerate ourselves to ourselves, or do we often recognize
ourselves for the actual men we are? The lightning is an exaggeration
of light. We live by exaggeration. Exaggerated history is poetry, and
is truth referred to a new standard. To a small man every greater one
is an exaggeration. No truth was ever expressed but with this sort of
emphasis, so that for the time there was no other truth. The value of
what is really valuable can never be exaggerated. You must speak loud to
those who are hard of hearing; so you acquire a habit of speaking loud
to those who are not. In order to appreciate any, even the humblest,
man, you must not only understand, but you must first love him; and
there never was such an exaggerator as love. Who are we? Are we not all
of us great men? And yet what [are] we actually? Nothing, certainly, to
speak of. By an immense exaggeration we appreciate our Greek poetry and
philosophy, Egyptian ruins, our Shakespeares and Miltons, our liberty
and Christianity. We give importance to this hour over all other hours.
We do not live by justice, but [by grace.][445]

       *       *       *       *       *

Love never perjures itself, nor is it mistaken.

       *       *       *       *       *

He is not the great writer, who is afraid to let the world know that he
ever committed an impropriety. Does it not know that all men are mortal?

       *       *       *       *       *

Carlyle told R. W. E. that he first discovered that he was not a jackass
on reading "Tristram Shandy" and Rousseau's "Confessions," especially
the last. His first essay is an article in _Fraser's Magazine_ on two
boys quarrelling.

       *       *       *       *       *

Youth wants something to look up to, to look forward to; as the little
boy who inquired of me the other day, "How long do those old-agers
live?" and expressed the intention of compassing two hundred summers at
least. The old man who cobbles shoes without glasses at a hundred, and
cuts a handsome swath at a hundred and five, is indispensable to give
dignity and respectability to our life.

       *       *       *       *       *

From all points of the compass, from the earth beneath and the heavens
above, have come these inspirations and been entered duly in the order
of their arrival in the journal. Thereafter, when the time arrived, they
were winnowed into lectures, and again, in due time, from lectures into
essays. And at last they stand, like the cubes of Pythagoras, firmly on
either basis; like statues on their pedestals, but the statues rarely
take hold of hands. There is only such connection and series as is
attainable in the galleries. And this affects their immediate practical
and popular influence.

       *       *       *       *       *

Carlyle, we should say, more conspicuously than any other, though with
little enough expressed or even conscious sympathy, represents the
Reformer class. In him the universal plaint is most settled and serious.
Until the thousand named and nameless grievances are righted, there will
be no repose for him in the lap of Nature or the seclusion of science
and literature. And all the more for not being the visible acknowledged
leader of any class.[446]

       *       *       *       *       *

All places, all positions—all things in short—are a medium happy or
unhappy. Every realm has its centre, and the nearer to that the better
while you are in it. Even health is only the happiest of all mediums.
There may be excess, or there may be deficiency; in either case there
is disease. A man must only be _virtuous_ enough.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had one neighbor within half a mile for a short time when I first
went to the woods, Hugh Quoil, an Irishman who had been a soldier at
Waterloo, Colonel Quoil, as he was called,—I believe that he had killed
a colonel and ridden off his horse,—who lived from hand—sometimes to
mouth,—though it was commonly a glass of rum that the hand carried. He
and his wife awaited their fate together in an old ruin in Walden woods.
What life he got—or what means of death—he got by ditching.

I never was much acquainted with Hugh Quoil, though sometimes I met him
in the path, and now do believe that a solid shank-bone, and skull which
no longer aches, lie somewhere, and can still be produced, which once
with garment of flesh and broadcloth were called and hired to do work
as Hugh Quoil. He was a man of manners and gentlemanlike, as one who
had seen the world, and was capable of more civil speech than you could
well attend to. At a distance he had seemingly a ruddy face as of biting
January, but nearer at hand it was bright carmine. It would have burnt
your finger to touch his cheek. He wore a straight-bodied snuff-colored
coat which had long been familiar with him, and carried a turf-knife in
his hand—instead of a sword. He had fought on the English side before,
but he fought on the Napoleon side now. Napoleon went to St. Helena;
Hugh Quoil came to Walden Pond. I heard that he used to tell travellers
who inquired about myself that —— and Thoreau owned the _farm_ together,
but Thoreau lived on the _place_ and carried it on.[447]

He was thirstier than I, and drank more, probably, but not out of
the pond. That was never the lower for him. Perhaps I ate more than
he. The last time I met him, the only time I spoke with him, was at
the foot of the hill on the highway as I was crossing to the spring
one summer afternoon, the pond water being too warm for me. I was
crossing the road with a pail in my hand, when Quoil came down the
hill, wearing his snuff-colored coat, as if it were winter, and shaking
with delirium-tremens. I hailed him and told him that my errand was to
get water at a spring close by, only at the foot of the hill over the
fence. He answered, with stuttering and parched lips, bloodshot eye,
and staggering gesture, he'd like to see it. "Follow me there, then."
But I had got my pail full and back before he scaled the fence. And he,
drawing his coat about him, to warm him, or to cool him, answered in
delirium-tremens, hydrophobia dialect, which is not easy to be written
here, he'd heard of it, but had never seen it; and so shivered his way
along to town,—to liquor and to oblivion.

On Sundays, brother Irishmen and others, who had gone far astray
from steady habits and the village, crossed my bean-field with empty
jugs toward Quoil's. But what for? Did they sell rum there? I asked.
"Respectable people they," "Know no harm of them," "Never heard that
they drank too much," was the answer of all wayfarers. They went by
sober, stealthy, silent, skulking (no harm to get elm bark Sundays);
returned loquacious, sociable, having long intended to call on you.

At length one afternoon Hugh Quoil, feeling better, perchance, with
snuff-colored coat, as usual, paced solitary and soldier-like, thinking
[of] Waterloo, along the woodland road to the foot of the hill by
the spring; and there the Fates met him, and threw him down in his
snuff-colored coat on the gravel, and got ready to cut his thread;
but not till travellers passed, who would raise him up, get him
perpendicular, then settle, settle quick; but legs, what are they? "Lay
me down," says Hugh hoarsely. "House locked up—key—in pocket—wife in
town." And the Fates cut, and there he lay by the wayside, five feet
ten, and looking taller than in life.

He has gone away; his house here "all tore to pieces." What kind of
fighting or ditching work he finds to do now, how it fares with him,
whether his thirst is quenched, whether there is still some semblance of
that carmine cheek, struggles still with some liquid demon—perchance on
more equal terms—till he swallow him completely, I cannot by any means
learn. What his salutation is now, what his January-morning face, what
he thinks of Waterloo, what start he has gained or lost, what work still
for the ditcher and forester and soldier now, there is no evidence. He
was here, the likes of him, for a season, standing light in his shoes
like a faded gentleman, with gesture almost learned in drawing-rooms;
wore clothes, hat, shoes, cut ditches, felled wood, did farm work for
various people, kindled fires, worked enough, ate enough, drank too
much. He was one of those unnamed, countless sects of philosophers who
founded no school.

Now that he was gone, and his wife was gone too,—for she could not
support the solitude,—before it was too late and the house was torn
down, I went over to make a call. Now that Irishmen with jugs avoided
the old house, I visited it,—an "unlucky castle now," said they. There
lay his old clothes curled up by habit, as if it were himself, upon his
raised plank bed. His pipe lay broken on the hearth; and scattered about
were soiled cards—king of diamonds, hearts, spades—on the floor. One
black chicken, which they could not catch, still went to roost in the
next apartment, stepping silent over the floor, frightened by the sound
of its own wings, black as night and as silent, too, not even croaking;
awaiting Reynard, its god actually dead. There was the dim outline of a
garden which had been planted, but had never received its first hoeing,
now overrun with weeds, with burs and cockles, which stick to your
clothes; as if in the spring he had contemplated a harvest of corn and
beans before that strange trembling of the limbs overtook him. Skin of
woodchuck fresh-stretched, never to be cured, met once in bean-field by
the Waterloo man with uplifted hoe; no cap, no mittens wanted. Pipe on
hearth no more to be lighted, best buried with him.[448]

       *       *       *       *       *

No thirst for glory, only for strong drink.

       *       *       *       *       *

Only the convalescent are conscious of the health of nature.

       *       *       *       *       *

In case of an embargo there will be found to be old clothes enough in
everybody's garret to last till the millennium. We are fond of news,
novelties, new things. The bank-bill that is torn in two will pass if
you save the pieces, if you have only got the essential piece with the
signatures. Lowell and Manchester and Fall River think you will let go
their broadcloth currency when it is torn; but hold on, have an eye to
the signature about the back of it, and endorse the man's name from whom
you received it, and they will be the first to fail and find nothing at
all in their garrets. Every day our garments become more assimilated to
the man that wears them, more near and dear to us, and not finally to
be laid aside but with such delay and medical appliance and solemnity
as our other mortal coil.[449] We know, after all, but few men, a great
many coats and breeches. Dress a scarecrow with your last shift, you
standing shiftless by, who would not soonest address the scarecrow and
salute it?[450]

King James loved his old shoes best. Who does not? Indeed these new
clothes are often won and worn only after a most painful birth. At
first movable prisons, oyster-shells which the tide only raises, opens,
and shuts, washing in what scanty nutriment may be afloat. How many
men walk over the limits, carrying their limits with them? In the
stocks they stand, not without gaze of multitudes, only without rotten
eggs, in torturing boots, the last wedge but one driven. Why should
we be startled at death? Life is constant putting off of the mortal
coil,—coat, cuticle, flesh and bones, all old clothes.

Not till the prisoner has got some rents in his prison walls,
possibility of egress without lock and key some day,—result of steel
watch-spring rubbing on iron grate, or whatever friction and wear and
tear,—will he rest contented in his prison.

Clothes brought in sewing, a kind of work you may call endless.[451]

A man who has at length found out something important to do will not
have to get a new suit to do it in. For him the old will do, lying
dusty in the garret for an indefinite period. Old shoes will serve a
hero longer than they have served his valet. Bare feet are the oldest
of shoes, and he can make them do. Only they who go to legislature
and soirées,—they must have new coats, coats to turn as often as the
man turns in them. Who ever saw his old shoes, his old coat, actually
worn out, returned to their original elements, so that it was not [a]
deed [of] charity to bestow them on some poorer boy, and by him to be
bestowed on some poorer still, or shall we say on some richer who can
do with less?[452]

       *       *       *       *       *

Over eastward of my bean-field lived Cato Ingraham, slave, born slave,
perhaps, of Duncan Ingraham, Esquire, gentleman, of Concord village,
who built him a house and gave him permission to live in Walden Woods,
for which no doubt he was thanked; and then, on the northeast corner,
Zilpha, colored woman of fame; and down the road, on the right hand,
Brister, colored man, on Brister's Hill, where grow still those little
wild apples he tended, now large trees, but still wild and ciderish
to my taste; and farther still you come to Breed's location, and again
on the left, by well and roadside, Nutting lived. Farther up the road,
at the pond's end, Wyman, the potter, who furnished his townsmen with
earthenware,—the squatter.[453]

Now only a dent in the earth marks the site of most of these human
dwellings; sometimes the well-dent where a spring oozed, now dry and
tearless grass, or covered deep,—not to be discovered till late days by
accident,—with a flat stone under the sod. These dents, like deserted
fox-burrows, old holes, where once was the stir and bustle of human life
overhead, and man's destiny, "fate, free-will, foreknowledge absolute,"
were all by turns discussed.

Still grows the vivacious lilac for a generation after the last vestige
else is gone, unfolding still its early sweet-scented blossoms in the
spring, to be plucked only by the musing traveller; planted, tended,
weeded [?], watered by children's hands in front-yard plot,—now by
wall-side in retired pasture, or giving place to a new rising forest.
The last of that stirp, sole survivor of that family. Little did
the dark children think that that weak slip with its two eyes which
they watered would root itself so, and outlive them, and house in
the rear that shaded it, and grown man's garden and field, and tell
their story to the retired wanderer a half-century after they were no
more,—blossoming as fair, smelling as sweet, as in that first spring.
Its still cheerful, tender, civil lilac colors.[454]

The woodland road, though once more dark and shut in by the forest,
resounded with the laugh and gossip of inhabitants, and was notched
and dotted here and there with their little dwellings. Though now but
a humble rapid passage to neighboring villages or for the woodman's
team, it once delayed the traveller longer, and was a lesser village in
itself.[455]

You still hear from time to time the whinnering of the raccoon, still
living as of old in hollow trees, washing its food before it eats it.
The red fox barks at night. The loon comes in the fall to sail and
bathe in the pond, making the woods ring with its wild laughter in the
early morning, at rumor of whose arrival all Concord sportsmen are
on the alert, in gigs, on foot, two by two, three [by three], with
patent rifles, patches, conical balls, spy-glass or open hole over
the barrel. They seem already to hear the loon laugh; come rustling
through the woods like October leaves, these on this side, those on
that, for the poor loon cannot be omnipresent; if he dive here, must
come up somewhere. The October wind rises, rustling the leaves, ruffling
the pond water, so that no loon can be seen rippling the surface. Our
sportsmen scour, sweep the pond with spy-glass in vain, making the
woods ring with rude [?] charges of powder, for the loon went off in
that morning rain with one loud, long, hearty laugh, and our sportsmen
must beat a retreat to town and stable and daily routine, shop work,
unfinished jobs again.[456]

Or in the gray dawn the sleeper hears the long ducking gun explode over
toward Goose Pond, and, hastening to the door, sees the remnant of
a flock, black duck or teal, go whistling by with outstretched neck,
with broken ranks, but in ranger order. And the silent hunter emerges
into the carriage road with ruffled feathers at his belt, from the dark
pond-side where he has lain in his bower since the stars went out.

And for a week you hear the circling clamor, clangor, of some solitary
goose through the fog, seeking its mate, peopling the woods with a
larger life than they can hold.[457]

For hours in fall days you shall watch the ducks cunningly tack and
veer and hold the middle of the pond, far from the sportsman on the
shore,—tricks they have learned and practiced in far Canada lakes or in
Louisiana bayous.[458]

The waves rise and dash, taking sides with all waterfowl.[459]

       *       *       *       *       *

Then in dark winter mornings, in short winter afternoons, the pack
of hounds, threading all woods with hounding cry and yelp, unable to
resist the instinct of the chase, and note of hunting-horn at intervals,
showing that man too is in the rear. And the woods ring again, and yet
no fox bursts forth on to the open level of the pond, and no following
pack after their Actæon.[460]

       *       *       *       *       *

But this small village, germ of something more, why did it fail while
Concord grows apace? No natural advantages, no water privilege, only
the deep Walden Pond and cool Brister's Spring,—privileges to drink
long, healthy, pure draughts, alas, all unimproved by those men but
to dilute their glass. Might not the basket-making, stable-broom,
mat-making, corn-parching, potters' business have thrived here, making
the wilderness to blossom as the rose? Now, all too late for commerce,
this waste, depopulated district has its railroad too. And transmitted
the names of unborn Bristers, Catos, Hildas,[461] Zilphas to a remote
and grateful posterity.

Again Nature will try, with me for a first settler, and my house raised
last spring to be the oldest in the settlement.

The sterile soil would have been proof against any lowland
degeneracy.[462]

Farmers far and near call it the paradise of beans.

And here, too, on winter days, while yet is cold January, and snow and
ice lie thick, comes the prudent, foreseeing landlord or housekeeper
(anticipating thirst) from the village, to get ice to cool his summer
drink,—a grateful beverage if he should live, if time should endure so
long. How few so wise, so industrious, to lay up treasures which neither
rust nor melt, "to cool their summer drink" one day!

And cut off the solid pond, the element and air of fishes, held fast
with chain and stake like corded wood, all through favoring, willing,
kind, permitting winter air to wintery cellar, to underlie the summer
there. And cut and saw the cream of the pond, unroof the house of
fishes.[463]

And in early mornings come men with fishing-reels and slender lunch, men
of real faith, and let down their fine lines and live minnows through
the snowy field to hook the pickerel and perch.[464]

       *       *       *       *       *

With buried well-stones, and strawberries, raspberries, thimble-berries
growing on the sunny sward there; some pitchy pine or gnarled oak in
the chimney-nook, or the sweet-scented black birch where the doorstone
was.[465]

Breed's,—history must not yet tell the tragedies enacted there. Let time
intervene to assuage and lend an azure atmospheric tint to them.[466]

       *       *       *       *       *

There is something pathetic in the sedentary life of men who have
travelled. They must naturally die when they leave the road.

What seems so fair and poetic in antiquity—almost fabulous—is realized,
too, in Concord life. As poets and historians brought their work to the
Grecian games, and genius wrestled there as well as strength of body, so
have we seen works of kindred genius read at our Concord games, by their
author, in their own Concord amphitheatre. It is virtually repeated by
all ages and nations.[467]

       *       *       *       *       *

Moles nesting in your cellar and nibbling every third potato.[468]
A whole rabbit-warren only separated from you by the flooring.
To be saluted when you stir in the dawn by the hasty departure
of Monsieur,—thump, thump, thump, striking his head against the
floor-timbers.[469] Squirrels and field mice that hold to a community
of property in your stock of chestnuts.

The blue jays suffered few chestnuts to reach the ground, resorting to
your single tree in flocks in the early morning, and picking them out
of the burs at a great advantage.

The crop of blackberries small; berries not yet grown. Ground-nuts not
dug.

       *       *       *       *       *

One wonders how so much, after all, was expressed in the old way, so
much here depends upon the emphasis, tone, pronunciation, style, and
spirit of the reading. No writer uses so profusely all the aids to
intelligibility which the printer's art affords. You wonder how others
had contrived to write so many pages without emphatic, italicized words,
they are so expressive, so natural and indispensable, here. As if none
had ever used the demonstrative pronoun demonstratively. In another's
sentences the thought, though immortal, is, as it were, embalmed and
does not _strike_ you, but here it is so freshly living, not purified
by the ordeal of death, that it stirs in the very extremities, the
smallest particles and pronouns are all alive with it.—You must not
say it, but _it_. It is not simple it, your it or mine, but _it_. His
books are solid, workmanlike, like all that England does. They tell
of endless labor done, well done, and all the rubbish swept away, like
this bright cutlery which glitters in the windows, while the coke and
ashes, turnings, filings, borings, dust lie far away at Birmingham,
unheard of. The words did not come at the command of grammar but of a
tyrannous, inexorable meaning; not like the standing soldiers, by vote
of Parliament, but any able-bodied countryman pressed into the service.
It is no China war, but a revolution. This style is worth attending
to as one of the most important features of the man that we at this
distance know.[470]

       *       *       *       *       *

What are the men of New England about? I have travelled some in New
England, especially in Concord, and I found that no enterprise was on
foot which it would not disgrace a man to take part in. They seemed to
be employed everywhere in shops and offices and fields. They seemed,
like the Brahmins of the East, to be doing penance in a thousand
curious, unheard-of ways, their endurance surpassing anything I had ever
seen or heard of,—Simeon Stylites, Brahmins looking in the face of the
sun, standing on one leg, dwelling at the roots of trees, nothing to
it; any of the twelve labors of Hercules to be matched,—the Nemean lion,
Lernæan hydra, Œnœan stag, Erymanthian boar, Augean stables, Stymphalian
birds, Cretan bull, Diomedes' mares, Amazonian girdle, monster Geryon,
Hesperian apples, three-headed Cerberus, nothing at all in comparison,
being only twelve and having an end. For I could never see that these
men ever slew or captured any of their monsters, or finished any of
their labors. They have no "friend Iolaus to burn, with a hot iron,
the root" of the hydra's head; for as soon as one head is crushed, two
spring up.[471]

Men labor under a mistake; they are laying up treasures which moth and
rust will corrupt and thieves break through and steal. Northern Slavery,
or the slavery which includes the Southern, Eastern, Western, and all
others.[472]

It is hard to have a Southern overseer; it is worse to have a Northern
one; but worst of all when you are yourself the slave-driver. Look at
the lonely teamster on the highway, wending to market by day or night;
is he a son of the morning, with somewhat of divinity in him, fearless
because immortal, going to receive his birthright, greeting the sun as
his fellow, bounding with youthful, gigantic strength over his mother
earth? See how he cowers and sneaks, how vaguely, indefinitely all the
day he fears, not being immortal, not divine, the slave and prisoner of
his own opinion of himself, fame which he has earned by his own deeds.
Public opinion is a weak tyrant compared with private opinion. What I
think of myself, that determines my fate.[473]

I see young men, my equals, who have inherited from their spiritual
father a soul,—broad, fertile, uncultivated,—from their earthly father
a farm,—with cattle and barns and farming tools, the implements of the
picklock and the counterfeiter. Better if they had been born in the
open pasture and suckled by a wolf, or perhaps cradled in a manger, that
they might have seen with clear eye what was the field they were called
to labor in. The young man has got to live a man's life, then, in this
world, pushing all these things before him, and get on as well as he
can. How many a poor immortal soul I have met, well-nigh crushed and
smothered, creeping slowly down the road of life, pushing before it a
barn seventy-five by forty feet and one hundred acres of land,—tillage,
pasture, wood-lot! This dull, opaque garment of the flesh is load enough
for the strongest spirit, but with such an earthly garment superadded
the spiritual life is soon plowed into the soil for compost. It's a
fool's life, as they will all find when they get to the end of it. The
man that goes on accumulating property when the bare necessaries of life
are cared for is a fool and knows better.[474]

There is a stronger desire to be respectable to one's neighbors than to
one's self.

However, such distinctions as poet, philosopher, literary man, etc., do
not much assist our final estimate. We do not lay much stress on them;
"a man's a man for a' that." Any writer who interests us much is all
and more than these.

It is not simple dictionary it.[475]

Talent at making books solid, workmanlike, graceful, which may be
read.[476]

Some idyllic chapter or chapters are needed.

In the French Revolution are Mirabeau, king of men; Danton, Titan of
the Revolution; Camille Desmoulins, poetic editor; Roland, heroic woman;
Dumouriez, first efficient general: on the other side, Marat, friend of
the people; Robespierre; Tinville, infernal judge; St. Just; etc., etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nutting and Le Gros by the wall-side. The Stratten house and barn where
the orchard covered all the slope of Brister's Hill,—now killed out by
the pines.

Brister Freeman, a handy negro, slave once of Squire Cummings (?), and
Fenda, his hospitable, pleasant wife, large, round, black, who told
fortunes, blacker than all the children of night, such a dusky orb as
had never risen on Concord before.

Zilpha's little house where "she was spinning linen," making the
Walden woods ring with her shrill singing,—a loud, shrill, remarkable
voice,—when once she was away to town, set on fire by English soldiers
on parole, in the last war, and cat and dog and hens all burned up.
Boiling her witch's dinner, and heard muttering to herself over the
gurgling pot by silent traveller, "Ye are all bones, bones."

And Cato, the Guinea negro,—his house and little patch among the
walnuts,—who let the trees grow up till he should be old, and Richardson
got them.

Where Breed's house stood tradition says a tavern once stood, the well
the same, and all a swamp between the woods and town, and road made on
logs.[477]

       *       *       *       *       *

Bread I made pretty well for awhile, while I remembered the rules; for
I studied this out methodically, going clear back to the primitive days
and first invention of the unleavened kind, and coming gradually down
through that lucky accidental souring of the dough which taught men the
leavening process, and all the various fermentations thereafter, till
you get to "good, sweet, wholesome bread," the staff of life. I went
on very well, mixing rye and flour and Indian and potato with success,
till one morning I had forgotten the rules, and thereafter scalded the
yeast,—killed it out,—and so, after the lapse of a month, was glad after
all to learn that such palatable staff of life could be made out of the
dead and scalt creature and risings that lay flat.

I have hardly met with the housewife who has gone so far with this
mystery. For all the farmers' wives pause at yeast. Given this and they
can make bread. It is the axiom of the argument. What it is, where it
came from, in what era bestowed on man, is wrapped in mystery. It is
preserved religiously, like the vestal fire, and its virtue is not yet
run out. Some precious bottleful, first brought over in the Mayflower,
did the business for America, and its influence is still rising,
swelling, spreading like Atlantic billows over the land,—the soul of
bread, the spiritus, occupying its cellular tissue.[478]

       *       *       *       *       *

The way to compare men is to compare their respective ideals. The actual
man is too complex to deal with.

Carlyle is an earnest, honest, heroic worker as literary man and
sympathizing brother of his race.

Idealize a man, and your notion takes distinctness at once.

Carlyle's talent is perhaps quite equal to his genius.[479]

Striving [?] to live in reality,—not a general critic, philosopher, or
poet.

Wordsworth, with very feeble talent, has not so great and admirable as
unquestionable and persevering genius.

Heroism, heroism is his word,—his thing.

He would realize a brave and adequate human life, and die hopefully at
last.

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson again is a critic, poet, philosopher, with talent not so
conspicuous, not so adequate to his task; but his field is still higher,
his task more arduous. Lives a far more intense life; seeks to realize
a divine life; his affections and intellect equally developed. Has
advanced farther, and a new heaven opens to him. Love and Friendship,
Religion, Poetry, the Holy are familiar to him. The life of an Artist;
more variegated, more observing, finer perception; not so robust,
elastic; practical enough in his own field; faithful, a judge of men.
There is no such general critic of men and things, no such trustworthy
and faithful man. More of the divine realized in him than in any. A
poetic critic, reserving the unqualified nouns for the gods.

       *       *       *       *       *

Alcott is a geometer, a visionary, the Laplace of ethics, more
intellect, less of the affections, sight beyond talents, a substratum of
practical skill and knowledge unquestionable, but overlaid and concealed
by a faith in the unseen and impracticable. Seeks to realize an entire
life; a catholic observer; habitually takes in the farthest star and
nebula into his scheme. Will be the last man to be disappointed as the
ages revolve. His attitude is one of greater faith and expectation
than that of any man I know; with little to show; with undue share,
for a philosopher, of the weaknesses of humanity. The most hospitable
intellect, embracing high and low. For children how much that means,
for the insane and vagabond, for the poet and scholar![480]

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson has special talents unequalled. The divine in man has had no
more easy, methodically distinct expression. His personal influence upon
young persons greater than any man's. In his world every man would be
a poet, Love would reign, Beauty would take place, Man and Nature would
harmonize.

       *       *       *       *       *

When Alcott's day comes, laws unsuspected by most will take effect,[481]
the system will crystallize according to them, all seals and falsehood
will slough off, everything will be in its place.


_Feb. 22_ [no year]. Jean Lapin sat at my door to-day, three paces from
me, at first trembling with fear, yet unwilling to move; a poor, wee
thing, lean and bony, with ragged ears and sharp nose, scant tail and
slender paws. It looked as if nature no longer contained the breed of
nobler bloods, the earth stood on its last legs. Is nature, too, unsound
at last? I took two steps, and lo, away he scud with elastic spring
over the snowy crust into the bushes, a free creature of the forest,
still wild and fleet; and such then was his nature, and his motion
asserted its vigor and dignity. Its large eye looked at first young
and diseased, almost dropsical, unhealthy. But it bound[ed] free, the
venison, straightening its body and its limbs into graceful length, and
soon put the forest between me and itself.[482]

       *       *       *       *       *

Emerson does not consider things in respect to their essential utility,
but an important partial and relative one, as works of art perhaps. His
probes pass one side of their centre of gravity. His exaggeration is of
a part, not of the whole.

       *       *       *       *       *

How many an afternoon has been stolen from more profitable, if not
more attractive, industry,—afternoons when a good run of custom might
have been expected on the main street, such as tempt the ladies out
a-shopping,—spent, I say, by me away in the meadows, in the well-nigh
hopeless attempt to set the river on fire or be set on fire by it, with
such tinder as I had, with such flint as I was. Trying at least to make
it flow with milk and honey, as I had heard of, or liquid gold, and
drown myself without getting wet,—a laudable enterprise, though I have
not much to show for it.

So many autumn days spent outside the town, trying to hear what was
in the wind, to hear it and carry it express. I well-nigh sunk all
my capital in it, and lost my own breath into the bargain, by running
in the face of it. Depend upon it, if it had concerned either of the
parties, it would have appeared in the yeoman's gazette, the _Freeman_,
with other earliest intelligence.

For many years I was self-appointed inspector of snow-storms and
rain-storms, and did my duty faithfully, though I never received one
cent for it.

Surveyor, if not of higher ways, then of forest paths and all across-lot
routes, keeping many open ravines bridged and passable at all seasons,
where the public heel had testified to the importance of the same,
all not only without charge, but even at considerable risk and
inconvenience. Many a mower would have forborne to complain had he been
aware of the invisible public good that was in jeopardy.

So I went on, I may say without boasting, I trust, faithfully minding my
business without a partner, till it became more and more evident that my
townsmen would not, after all, admit me into the list of town officers,
nor make the place a sinecure with moderate allowance.

I have looked after the wild stock of the town, which pastures in
common, and every one knows that these cattle give you a good deal of
trouble in the way of leaping fences. I have counted and registered
all the eggs I could find at least, and have had an eye to all nooks
and corners of the farm, though I didn't always know whether Jonas
or Solomon worked in a particular field to-day; that was none of my
business. I only knew him for one of the men, and trusted that he was as
well employed as I was. I had to make my daily entries in the general
farm book, and my duties may sometimes have made me a little stubborn
and unyielding.

Many a day spent on the hilltops waiting for the sky to fall, that
I might catch something, though I never caught much, only a little,
manna-wise, that would dissolve again in the sun.

My accounts, indeed, which I can swear to have been faithfully kept,
I have never got audited, still less accepted, still less paid and
settled. However, I haven't set my heart upon _that_.

I have watered the red huckleberry and the sand cherry and the hoopwood
[?] tree, and the cornel and spoonhunt and yellow violet, which might
have withered else in dry seasons. The white grape.

To find the bottom of Walden Pond, and what inlet and outlet it might
have.

       *       *       *       *       *

I found at length that, as they were not likely to offer me any office
in the court-house, any curacy or living anywhere else, I must shift
for myself, I must furnish myself with the necessaries of life.

Now watching from the observatory of the Cliffs or Annursnack to
telegraph any new arrival, to see if Wachusett, Watatic, or Monadnock
had got any nearer. Climbing trees for the same purpose. I have
been reporter for many years to one of the journals of no very wide
circulation, and, as is too common, got only my pains for my labor.
Literary contracts are little binding.[483]

The unlimited anxiety, strain, and care of some persons is one very
incurable form of disease. Simple arithmetic might have corrected it;
for the life of every man has, after all, an epic integrity, and Nature
adapts herself to our weaknesses and deficiencies as well as talents.

No doubt it is indispensable that we should do _our_ work between sun
and sun, but only a wise man will know what that is. And yet how much
work will be left undone, put off to the next day, and yet the system
goes on!

We presume commonly to take care of ourselves, and trust as little as
possible. Vigilant more or less all our days, we say our prayers at
night and commit ourselves to uncertainties, as if in our very days
and most vigilant moments the great part were not a necessary trust
still.[484] How serenity, anxiety, confidence, fear paint the heavens
for us.

All the laws of nature will bend and adapt themselves to the least
motion of man.

All change is a miracle to contemplate, but it is a miracle which is
taking place unobserved every instant; when all is ready it takes place,
and only a miracle could stay it.

We [are] compelled to live so thoroughly and sincerely, reflecting on
our steps, reverencing our life, that we never make allowance for the
possible changes.

We may waive just so much care of ourselves as we devote of care
elsewhere.[485]