Chapter I 1837.

_Oct 22._ "What are you doing now?" he asked. "Do you keep a journal?"
So I make my first entry to-day.


SOLITUDE

To be alone I find it necessary to escape the present,—I avoid myself.
How could I be alone in the Roman emperor's chamber of mirrors? I seek
a garret. The spiders must not be disturbed, nor the floor swept, nor
the lumber arranged.

The Germans say, "Es ist alles wahr wodurch du besser wirst."


THE MOULD OUR DEEDS LEAVE

_Oct. 24._ Every part of nature teaches that the passing away of one
life is the making room for another. The oak dies down to the ground,
leaving within its rind a rich virgin mould, which will impart a
vigorous life to an infant forest. The pine leaves a sandy and sterile
soil, the harder woods a strong and fruitful mould.

So this constant abrasion and decay makes the soil of my future growth.
As I live now so shall I reap. If I grow pines and birches, my virgin
mould will not sustain the oak; but pines and birches, or, perchance,
weeds and brambles, will constitute my second growth.[4]


SPRING

_Oct 25._ She appears, and we are once more children; we commence again
our course with the new year. Let the maiden no more return, and men
will become poets for very grief. No sooner has winter left us time
to regret her smiles, than we yield to the advances of poetic frenzy.
"The flowers look kindly at us from the beds with their child eyes,
and in the horizon the snow of the far mountains dissolves into light
vapor."—GOETHE, _Torquato Tasso_.


THE POET

     "He seems to avoid—even to flee from us,—
     To seek something which we know not,
     And perhaps he himself after all knows not."—_Ibid._


_Oct 26._

     "His eye hardly rests upon the earth;
     His ear hears the one-clang of nature;
     What history records,—what life gives,—
     Directly and gladly his genius takes it up:
     His mind collects the widely dispersed,
     And his feeling animates the inanimate.
     Often he ennobles what appeared to us common,
     And the prized is as nothing to him.
     In his own magic circle wanders
     The wonderful man, and draws us
     With him to wander, and take part in it:
     He seems to draw near to us, and remains afar from us:
     He seems to be looking at us, and spirits, forsooth,
     Appear to him strangely in our places."—_Ibid._


HOW MAN GROWS

"A noble man has not to thank a private circle for his culture.
Fatherland and world must work upon him. Fame and infamy must he learn
to endure. He will be constrained to know himself and others. Solitude
shall no more lull him with her flattery. The foe _will_ not, the
friend _dares_ not, spare him. Then, striving, the youth puts forth his
strength, feels what he is, and feels himself soon a man."

     "A talent is builded in solitude,
     A character in the stream of the world."

"He only fears man who knows him not, and he who avoids him will soonest
misapprehend him."—_Ibid._


ARIOSTO

"As nature decks her inward rich breast in a green variegated dress,
so clothes he all that can make men honorable in the blooming garb of
the fable.... The well of superfluity bubbles near, and lets us see
variegated wonder-fishes. The air is filled with rare birds, the meads
and copses with strange herds, wit lurks half concealed in the verdure,
and wisdom from time to time lets sound from a golden cloud sustained
words, while frenzy wildly seems to sweep the well-toned lute, yet holds
itself measured in perfect time."


BEAUTY

"That beauty is transitory which alone you seem to honor."—GOETHE,
_Torquato Tasso_.


THE FOG

_Oct. 27._ The prospect is limited to Nobscot and Annursnack. The trees
stand with boughs downcast like pilgrims beaten by a storm, and the
whole landscape wears a sombre aspect.

So when thick vapors cloud the soul, it strives in vain to escape from
its humble working-day valley, and pierce the dense fog which shuts out
from view the blue peaks in its horizon, but must be content to scan
its near and homely hills.


DUCKS AT GOOSE POND

_Oct 29._ Two ducks, of the summer or wood species, which were merrily
dabbling in their favorite basin, struck up a retreat on my approach,
and seemed disposed to take French leave, paddling off with swan-like
majesty. They are first-rate swimmers, beating me at a round pace,
and—what was to me a new trait in the duck character—dove every
minute or two and swam several feet under water, in order to escape
our attention. Just before immersion they seemed to give each other
a significant nod, and then, as if by a common understanding, 'twas
heels up and head down in the shaking of a duck's wing. When they
reappeared, it was amusing to observe with what a self-satisfied,
darn-it-how-he-nicks-'em air they paddled off to repeat the experiment.


THE ARROWHEAD

A curious incident happened some four or six weeks ago which I think
it worth the while to record. John and I had been searching for Indian
relics, and been successful enough to find two arrowheads and a pestle,
when, of a Sunday evening, with our heads full of the past and its
remains, we strolled to the mouth of Swamp Bridge Brook. As we neared
the brow of the hill forming the bank of the river, inspired by my
theme, I broke forth into an extravagant eulogy on those savage times,
using most violent gesticulations by way of illustration. "There on
Nawshawtuct," said I, "was their lodge, the rendezvous of the tribe, and
yonder, on Clamshell Hill, their feasting ground. This was, no doubt,
a favorite haunt; here on this brow was an eligible lookout post. How
often have they stood on this very spot, at this very hour, when the
sun was sinking behind yonder woods and gilding with his last rays
the waters of the Musketaquid, and pondered the day's success and the
morrow's prospects, or communed with the spirit of their fathers gone
before them to the land of shades!

"Here," I exclaimed, "stood Tahatawan; and there" (to complete the
period) "is Tahatawan's arrowhead."

We instantly proceeded to sit down on the spot I had pointed to, and I,
to carry out the joke, to lay bare an ordinary stone which my whim had
selected, when lo! the first I laid hands on, the grubbing stone that
was to be, proved a most perfect arrowhead, as sharp as if just from
the hands of the Indian fabricator!!!


SUNRISE

_Oct. 30._ First we have the gray twilight of the poets, with dark and
barry clouds diverging to the zenith. Then glows the intruding cloud in
the east, as if it bore a precious jewel in its bosom; a deep round gulf
of golden gray indenting its upper edge, while slender rules of fleecy
vapor, radiating from the common centre, like light-armed troops, fall
regularly into their places.


SAILING WITH AND AGAINST THE STREAM

_Nov. 3._ If one would reflect, let him embark on some placid stream,
and float with the current. He cannot resist the Muse. As we ascend the
stream, plying the paddle with might and main, snatched and impetuous
thoughts course through the brain. We dream of conflict, power, and
grandeur. But turn the prow down stream, and rock, tree, kine, knoll,
assuming new and varying positions, as wind and water shift the scene,
favor the liquid lapse of thought, far-reaching and sublime, but ever
calm and gently undulating.


TRUTH

_Nov. 5._ Truth strikes us from behind, and in the dark, as well as from
before and in broad daylight.


STILL STREAMS RUN DEEPEST

_Nov. 9._ It is the rill whose "silver sands and pebbles sing eternal
ditties with the spring." The early frosts bridge its narrow channel,
and its querulous note is hushed. Only the flickering sunlight on its
sandy bottom attracts the beholder. But there are souls whose depths
are never fathomed,—on whose bottom the sun never shines. We get a
distant view from the precipitous banks, but never a draught from their
mid-channels. Only a sunken rock or fallen oak can provoke a murmur,
and their surface is a stranger to the icy fetters which bind fast a
thousand contributory rills.[5]


DISCIPLINE

_Nov. 12._ I yet lack discernment to distinguish the whole lesson of
to-day; but it is not lost,—it will come to me at last. My desire is to
know _what_ I have lived, that I may know _how_ to live henceforth.


SIN DESTROYS THE PERCEPTION OF THE BEAUTIFUL

_Nov. 13._ This shall be the test of innocence—if I can hear a taunt,
and look out on this friendly moon, pacing the heavens in queen-like
majesty, with the accustomed yearning.


TRUTH

Truth is ever returning into herself. I glimpse one feature to-day,
another to-morrow; and the next day they are blended.


GOETHE

_Nov. 15._ "And now that it is evening, a few clouds in the mild
atmosphere rest upon the mountains, more stand still than move in the
heavens, and immediately after sunset the chirping of crickets begins to
increase; then feels one once more at home in the world, and not as an
alien,—an exile. I am contented as though I had been born and brought
up here, and now returned from a Greenland or whaling voyage. Even the
dust of my Fatherland, as it is whirled about the wagon, which for so
long a time I had not seen, is welcome. The clock-and-bell jingling
of the crickets is very agreeable, penetrating, and not without a
meaning. Pleasant is it when roguish boys whistle in emulation of a
field of such songstresses. One imagines that they really enhance each
other. The evening is perfectly mild as the day. Should an inhabitant
of the south, coming from the south, hear of my rapture, he would deem
me very childish. Alas! what I here express have I long felt under an
unpropitious heaven. And now this joy is to me an exception, which I am
henceforth to enjoy,—a necessity of my nature."—_Italiänische Reise._[6]


PONKAWTASSETT

_Nov. 16._ There goes the river, or rather is, "in serpent error
wandering," the jugular vein of Musketaquid. Who knows how much of
the proverbial moderation of the inhabitants was caught from its dull
circulation?

The snow gives the landscape a washing-day appearance,—here a streak
of white, there a streak of dark; it is spread like a napkin over the
hills and meadows. This must be a rare drying day, to judge from the
vapor that floats over the vast clothes-yard.

A hundred guns are firing and a flag flying in the village in
celebration of the whig victory. Now a short dull report,—the mere disk
of a sound, shorn of its beams,—and then a puff of smoke rises in the
horizon to join its misty relatives in the skies.


GOETHE

He gives such a glowing description of the old tower, that they who
had been born and brought up in the neighborhood must needs look over
their shoulders, "that they might behold with their eyes, what I had
praised to their ears, ... and I added nothing, not even the ivy which
for centuries had decorated the walls."—_Italiänische Reise._[7]


SUNRISE

_Nov. 17._ Now the king of day plays at bo-peep round the world's
corner, and every cottage window smiles a golden smile,—a very picture
of glee. I see the water glistening in the eye. The smothered breathings
of awakening day strike the ear with an undulating motion; over hill
and dale, pasture and woodland, come they to me, and I am at home in
the world.


THE SKY

If there is nothing new on earth, still there is something new in the
heavens. We have always a resource in the skies. They are constantly
turning a new page to view. The wind sets the types in this blue ground,
and the inquiring may always read a new truth.[8]


VIRGIL

_Nov. 18._ "Pulsae referunt ad sidera valles"[9] is such a line as would
save an epic; and how finely he concludes his "agrestem musam," now that
Silenus has done, and the stars have heard his story,—

     "Cogere donec oves stabulis, numerumque referre
     Jussit, et invito processit Vesper Olympo."


HARMONY

Nature makes no noise. The howling storm, the rustling leaf, the
pattering rain are no disturbance, there is an essential and unexplored
harmony in them. Why is it that thought flows with so deep and sparkling
a current when the sound of distant music strikes the ear? When I
would muse I complain not of a rattling tune on the piano—a Battle of
Prague even—if it be harmony, but an irregular, discordant drumming is
intolerable.


SHADOWS

When a shadow flits across the landscape of the soul, where is the
substance? Has it always its origin in sin? and is that sin in me?


VIRGIL

_Nov. 20._ I would read Virgil, if only that I might be reminded of the
identity of human nature in all ages. I take satisfaction in "jam laeto
turgent in palmite gemmae," or "Strata jacent passim sua quaeque sub
arbore poma." It was the same world, and the same men inhabited it.[10]


NAWSHAWTUCT

_Nov. 21._ One must needs climb a hill to know what a world he inhabits.
In the midst of this Indian summer I am perched on the topmost rock of
Nawshawtuct, a velvet wind blowing from the southwest. I seem to feel
the atoms as they strike my cheek. Hills, mountains, steeples stand out
in bold relief in the horizon, while I am resting on the rounded boss
of an enormous shield, the river like a vein of silver encircling its
edge, and thence the shield gradually rises to its rim, the horizon.
Not a cloud is to be seen, but villages, villas, forests, mountains,
one above another, till they are swallowed up in the heavens.[11] The
atmosphere is such that, as I look abroad upon the length and breadth
of the land, it recedes from my eye, and I seem to be looking for the
threads of the velvet.

Thus I admire the grandeur of my emerald carriage, with its border of
blue, in which I am rolling through space.


THOUGHTS

_Nov. 26._ I look around for thoughts when I am overflowing myself.
While I live on, thought is still in embryo,—it stirs not within me.
Anon it begins to assume shape and comeliness, and I deliver it, and
clothe it in its garment of language. But alas! how often when thoughts
choke me do I resort to a spat on the back, or swallow a crust, or do
anything but expectorate them!


HOAR FROST AND GREEN RIVER

_Nov. 28._ Every tree, fence, and spire of grass that could raise its
head above the snow was this morning covered with a dense hoar frost.
The trees looked like airy creatures of darkness caught napping. On
this side they were huddled together, their gray hairs streaming, in a
secluded valley which the sun had not yet penetrated, and on that they
went hurrying off in Indian file by hedgerows and watercourses, while
the shrubs and grasses, like elves and fairies of the night, sought to
hide their diminished heads in the snow.

The branches and taller grasses were covered with a wonderful
ice-foliage, answering leaf for leaf to their summer dress. The centre,
diverging, and even more minute fibres were perfectly distinct and the
edges regularly indented.

These leaves were on the side of the twig or stubble opposite to the sun
(when it was not bent toward the east), meeting it for the most part at
right angles, and there were others standing out at all possible angles
upon these, and upon one another.

It struck me that these ghost leaves and the green ones whose forms they
assume were the creatures of the same law. It could not be in obedience
to two several laws that the vegetable juices swelled gradually into the
perfect leaf on the one hand, and the crystalline particles trooped to
their standard in the same admirable order on the other.

The river, viewed from the bank above, appeared of a yellowish-green
color, but on a nearer approach this phenomenon vanished; and yet the
landscape was covered with snow.[12]


ICE-HARP

_Dec. 5._ My friend tells me he has discovered a new note in nature,
which he calls the Ice-Harp. Chancing to throw a handful of pebbles upon
the pond where there was an air chamber under the ice, it discoursed a
pleasant music to him.

Herein resides a tenth muse, and as he was the man to discover it
probably the extra melody is in him.


GOETHE

_Dec. 8._ He is generally satisfied with giving an exact description
of objects as they appear to him, and his genius is exhibited in the
points he seizes upon and illustrates. His description of Venice and
her environs as seen from the Marcusthurm is that of an unconcerned
spectator, whose object is faithfully to describe what he sees, and
that, too, for the most part, in the order in which he saw it. It
is this trait which is chiefly to be prized in the book; even the
reflections of the author do not interfere with his descriptions.

It would thus be possible for inferior minds to produce invaluable
books.[13]


MEASURE

_Dec. 10._ Not the carpenter alone carries his rule in his pocket.
Space is quite subdued to us. The meanest peasant finds in a hair of
his head, or the white crescent upon his nail, the unit of measure for
the distance of the fixed stars. His middle finger measures how many
_digits_ into space; he extends a few times his thumb and finger, and
the continent is _spanned_; he stretches out his arms, and the sea is
_fathomed_.


THOUGHT

_Dec. 12._ There are times when thought elbows her way through the
underwood of words to the clear blue beyond;

     "O'er bog, or steep, through strait, rough, dense, or rare,
     With head, hands, wings, or feet, pursues _her_ way,
     And swims, or sinks, or wades, or creeps, or flies;..."

but let her don her cumbersome working-day garment, and each sparkling
dewdrop will seem a "slough of despond."


PECULIARITY

When we speak of a peculiarity in a man or a nation, we think to
describe only one part, a mere mathematical point; but it is not so. It
pervades all. Some parts may be further removed than others from this
centre, but not a particle so remote as not to be either shined on or
shaded by it.


THORNS

No faculty in man was created with a useless or sinister intent; in no
respect can he be wholly bad, but the worst passions have their root
in the best,—as anger, for instance, may be only a perverted sense of
wrong which yet retains some traces of its origin.[14] So a spine is
proved to be only an abortive branch, "which, notwithstanding, even as
a spine, bears leaves, and, in _Euphorbia heptagona_, sometimes flowers
and fruit."


JACK FROST

_Dec. 15._ As further confirmation of the fact that vegetation is a kind
of crystallization, I observe that upon the edge of the melting frost
on the windows, Jack is playing singular freaks,—now bundling together
his needle-shaped leaves so as to resemble fields waving with grain, or
shocks of wheat rising here and there from the stubble. On one side the
vegetation of the torrid zone is presented you,—high-towering palms,
and widespread banyans, such as we see in pictures of Oriental scenery;
on the other are arctic pines, stiff-frozen, with branches downcast,
like the arms of tender men in frosty weather.[15] In some instances
the panes are covered with little feathery flocks, where the particles
radiate from a common centre, the number of radii varying from three
to seven or eight. The crystalline particles are partial to the creases
and flaws in the glass, and, when these extend from sash to sash, form
complete hedgerows, or miniature watercourses, where dense masses of
crystal foliage "high over-arched imbower."


FROZEN MIST

_Dec. 16._ The woods were this morning covered with thin bars of
vapor,—the evaporation of the leaves according to Sprengel,—which
seemed to have been suddenly stiffened by the cold. In some places it
was spread out like gauze over the tops of the trees, forming extended
lawns, where elves and fairies held high tournament;

                               "before each van
     Prick forth the aery knights, and couch their spears,
     Till thickest legions close."[16]

The east was glowing with a narrow but ill-defined crescent of light,
the blue of the zenith mingling in all possible proportions with the
salmon-color of the horizon. And now the neighboring hilltops telegraph
to us poor crawlers of the plain the Monarch's golden ensign in the
east, and anon his "long levelled rules" fall sector-wise, and humblest
cottage windows greet their lord.


FACTS

How indispensable to a correct study of Nature is a perception of her
true meaning. The fact will one day flower out into a truth. The season
will mature and fructify what the understanding had cultivated. Mere
accumulators of facts—collectors of materials for the master-workmen—are
like those plants growing in dark forests, which "put forth only leaves
instead of blossoms."


DRUIDS

_Dec. 17._ In all ages and nations we observe a leaning towards a right
state of things. This may especially be seen in the history of the
priest, whose life approaches most nearly to that of the ideal man. The
Druids paid no taxes, and "were allowed exemption from warfare and all
other things." The clergy are even now a privileged class.

In the last stage of civilization Poetry, Religion, and Philosophy will
be one; and this truth is glimpsed in the first. The druidical order was
divided into Druids, Bards, and Ouates. "The Bards were the poets and
musicians, of whom some were satirists, and some encomiasts. The Ouates
sacrificed, divined, and contemplated the nature of things. The Druids
cultivated physiology and moral philosophy; or, as Diodorus says, were
their philosophers and theologians."


GOETHE

_Dec. 18._ He required that his heroine, Iphigenia, should say nothing
which might not be uttered by the holy Agathe, whose picture he
contemplated.


IMMORTALITY POST

The nations assert an immortality _post_ as well as _ante_. The
Athenians wore a golden grasshopper as an emblem that they sprang from
the earth, and the Arcadians pretended that they were προσέληνοι, or
before the moon.

The Platos do not seem to have considered this back-reaching tendency
of the human mind.


THE PRIDE OF ANCESTRY

Men are pleased to be called the sons of their fathers,—so little truth
suffices them,—and whoever addresses them by this or a similar title is
termed a poet. The orator appeals to the sons of Greece, of Britannia,
of France, or of Poland; and our fathers' homely name acquires some
interest from the fact that Sakai-suna means sons-of-the-Sakai.[17]


HELL

_Dec. 19._ Hell itself may be contained within the compass of a spark.


SAXONS

The fact seems at first an anomalous one that the less a people have
to contend for the more tenacious they are of their rights. The Saxons
of Ditmarsia contended for a principle, not for their sterile sands and
uncultivated marshes.

We are on the whole the same Saxons that our fathers were, when it was
said of them, "They are emulous in hospitality, because to plunder and
to lavish is the glory of an Holsatian; not to be versed in the science
of depredation is, in his opinion, to be stupid and base."

The French are the same Franks of whom it is written, "Francis familiare
est ridendo fidem frangere;" "Gens Francorum infidelis est. Si perjeret
Francus quid novi faciet, qui perjuriam ipsam sermonis genus putat esse
non criminis."


CRYSTALS

I observed this morning that the ice at Swamp Bridge was checkered with
a kind of mosaic-work of white creases or channels; and when I examined
the under side, I found it to be covered with a mass of crystallizations
from three to five inches deep, standing, or rather depending, at right
angles to the true ice, which was about an eighth of an inch thick.
There was a yet older ice six or eight inches below this. The crystals
were for the most part triangular prisms with the lower end open,
though, in some cases, they had run into each other so as to form four
or five sided prisms. When the ice was laid upon its smooth side, they
resembled the roofs and steeples of a Gothic city, or the vessels of a
crowded haven under a press of canvas.

I noticed also that where the ice in the road had melted and left
the mud bare, the latter, as if crystallized, discovered countless
rectilinear fissures, an inch or more in length—a continuation, as it
were, of the checkered ice.[18]


_Dec. 22._ About a year ago, having set aside a bowl which had contained
some rhubarb grated in water, without wiping it, I was astonished to
find, a few days afterward, that the rhubarb had crystallized, covering
the bottom of the bowl with perfect cubes, of the color and consistency
of glue, and a tenth of an inch in diameter.


CRYSTALS

_Dec. 23._ Crossed the river to-day on the ice. Though the weather is
raw and wintry and the ground covered with snow, I noticed a solitary
robin, who looked as if he needed to have his services to the Babes in
the Woods speedily requited.

In the side of the high bank by the Leaning Hemlocks, there were some
curious crystallizations. Wherever the water, or other causes, had
formed a hole in the bank, its throat and outer edge, like the entrance
to a citadel of the olden time, bristled with a glistening ice armor.
In one place you might see minute ostrich feathers, which seemed the
waving plumes of the warriors filing into the fortress, in another the
glancing fan-shaped banners of the Lilliputian host, and in another the
needle-shaped particles, collected into bundles resembling the plumes
of the pine, might pass for a phalanx of spears.[19] The whole hill
was like an immense quartz rock, with minute crystals sparkling from
innumerable crannies. I tried to fancy that there was a disposition in
these crystallizations to take the forms of the contiguous foliage.


REVOLUTIONS

_Dec. 27._ Revolutions are never sudden. Not one man, nor many men, in a
few years or generations, suffice to regulate events and dispose mankind
for the revolutionary movement. The hero is but the crowning stone
of the pyramid,—the keystone of the arch. Who was Romulus or Remus,
Hengist or Horsa, that we should attribute to them Rome or England?
They are famous or infamous because the progress of events has chosen
to make them its stepping-stones. But we would know where the avalanche
commenced, or the hollow in the rock whence springs the Amazon. The most
important is apt to be some silent and unobtrusive fact in history. In
449 three Saxon cyules arrived on the British coast,—"Three scipen gode
comen mid than flode, three hundred cnihten."[20] The pirate of the
British coast was no more the founder of a state than the scourge of
the German shore.


HEROES

The real heroes of minstrelsy have been ideal, even when the names of
actual heroes have been perpetuated. The real Arthur, who "not only
excelled the experienced past, but also the possible future," of whom it
was affirmed for many centuries that he was not dead, but "had withdrawn
from the world into some magical region; from which at a future crisis
he was to reappear, and lead the Cymri in triumph through the island,"
whose character and actions were the theme of the bards of Bretagne
and the foundation of their interminable romances, was only an ideal
impersonation.

  [Illustration: _Frost Crystals_]

Men claim for the ideal an actual existence also, but do not often
expand the actual into the ideal. "If you do not believe me, go into
Bretagne, and mention in the streets or villages, that Arthur is really
dead like other men; you will not escape with impunity; you will be
either hooted with the curses of your hearers, or stoned to death."


HOMESICKNESS

The most remarkable instance of homesickness is that of the colony of
Franks transplanted by the Romans from the German Ocean to the Euxine,
who at length resolving to a man to abandon the country, seized the
vessels which carried them out, and reached at last their native shores,
after innumerable difficulties and dangers upon the Mediterranean and
Atlantic.


THE INTERESTING FACTS IN HISTORY

How cheering is it, after toiling through the darker pages of
history,—the heartless and fluctuating crust of human rest and
unrest,—to alight on the solid earth where the sun shines, or rest
in the checkered shade. The fact that Edwin of Northumbria "caused
stakes to be fixed in the highways where he had seen a clear spring,"
and that "brazen dishes were chained to them, to refresh the weary
sojourner, whose fatigues Edwin had himself experienced," is worth all
Arthur's twelve battles.[21] The sun again shines along the highway, the
landscape presents us sunny glades and occasional cultivated patches as
well as dark primeval forests, and it is merry England after all.


_Dec. 31._ As the least drop of wine tinges the whole goblet, so the
least particle of truth colors our whole life. It is never isolated, or
simply added as treasure to our stock. When any real progress is made,
we unlearn and learn anew what we thought we knew before. We go picking
up from year to year and laying side by side the _disjecta membra_ of
truth, as he who picked up one by one a row of a hundred stones, and
returned with each separately to his basket.