THEATER.

     I.   JOANNY.
     II.  MADEMOISELLE MARS.
     III. FREDERICK LEMAITRE.
     IV.  THE COMIQUES.
     V.   MADEMOISELLE GEORGES.
     VI.  TABLEAUX VIVANTS.




JOANNY. March 7, 1830, Midnight.



They have been playing “Hernani” at the Théâtre-Français since February
25. The receipts for each performance have been five thousand francs.
The public every night hisses all the verses. It is a rare uproar. The
parterre hoots, the boxes burst with laughter. The actors are abashed
and hostile; most of them ridicule what they have to say. The press has
been practically unanimous every morning in making fun of the piece and
the author. If I enter a reading room I cannot pick up a paper without
seeing: “Absurd as ‘Hernani’; silly, false, bombastic, pretentious,
extravagant and nonsensical as ‘Hernani’.” If I venture into the
corridors of the theatre while the performance is in progress I see
spectators issue from their boxes and slam the doors indignantly. Mlle.
Mars plays her part honestly and faithfully, but laughs at it, even in
my presence. Michelot plays his resignedly and laughs at it behind my
back. There is not a scene shifter, not a super, not a lamp lighter but
points his finger at me.

To-day I dined with Joanny, who had invited me. Joanny plays Ruy Gomez.
He lives at No. 1 Rue du Jardinet, with a young seminarist, his nephew.
The dinner party was sober and cordial. There were some journalists
there, among others M. Merle, the husband of Mme. Dorval. After dinner,
Joanny, who has the most beautiful white hair in the world, rose, filled
his glass, turned towards me. I was on his right hand. Here literally is
what he said to me; I have just returned home and I write his words:

“Monsieur Victor Hugo, the old man, now unknown, who two hundred years
ago filled the role of Don Diègue in ‘Le Cid’ was not more penetrated
with respect and admiration in presence of the great Corneille than the
old man who plays Don Buy Gomez is to-day in your presence.”




MADEMOISELLE MARS.



In her last illness Mlle. Mars was often delirious. One evening the
doctor arrived. She was in the throes of a high fever, and her mind was
wandering. She prattled about the theatre, her mother, her daughter,
her niece Georgina, about all that she held dear; she laughed, wept,
screamed, sighed deeply.

The doctor approached her bed and said to her: “Dear lady, calm
yourself, it is I.” She did not recognise him and her mind continued to
wander. He went on: “Come, show me your tongue, open your mouth.” Mlle.
Mars gazed at him, opened her mouth and said: “Here, look. Oh! all my
teeth are my very own!”

Célimène still lived.




FREDERICK LEMAITRE.



Frédérick Lemaitre is cross, morose and kind. He lives in retirement
with his children and his mistress, who at present is Mlle. Clarisse
Miroy.

Frédérick likes the table. He never invites anybody to dinner except
Porcher, the chief of the claque.* Fredérick and Porcher “thee-thou”
 each other. Porcher has common sense, good manners, and plenty of money,
which he lends gallantly to authors whose rent is due. Porcher is the
man of whom Harel said: “He likes, protects and disdains Literary men.”

* A band of men and boys who are paid to applaud a piece or a certain
actor or actress at a given signal. The applause contractor, or _chef de
claque_, is an important factor in French theatrical affairs.

Frédérick has never less than fifteen dishes at his table. When the
servant brings them in he looks at them and judges them without tasting
them. Often he says:

“That is bad.”

“Have you eaten of it?”

“No, God forbid!”

“But taste it.”

“It is detestable.”

“I will taste it,” says Clarisse.

“It is execrable. I forbid you to do so.”

“But let me try it.”

“Take that dish away! It is filthy!” And he sends for his cook and rates
her soundly.

He is greatly feared by all his household. His domestics live in a state
of terror. At table, if he does not speak, no one utters a word. Who
would dare to break the silence when he is mute? One would think it was
a dinner of dumb people, or a supper of Trappists, except for the good
cheer. He likes to wind up the repast with fish. If there is turbot he
has it served after the creams. He drinks, when dining, a bottle and
a half of Bordeaux wine. Then, after dinner, he lights his cigar, and
while smoking drinks two other bottles of wine.

For all that he is a comedian of genius and a very good fellow. He is
easily moved to tears, which start to his eyes at a word said to him
angrily or reproachfully.


This dates back to 1840. Mlle. Atala Beaudouin (the actress who under
the name of Louise Beaudouin created the role of the Queen in Ruy
Bias) had left Frédérick Lemaître, the great and marvellous comedian.
Frédérick adored her and was inconsolable.

Mlle. Atala’s mother had strongly advised her daughter on this occasion.
Frédérick was occasionally violent, notwithstanding that he was very
amorous; and, besides, a Russian prince had presented himself. In short,
Mlle. Atala persisted in her determination and positively refused to see
Frederick.

Frederick made frightful threats, especially against the mother. One
morning there was a violent ringing at Mlle. Atala’s bell. Her mother
opened the door and recoiled in terror. It was Frédérick. He entered,
dropped into the chair that was handiest to him, and said to the old
woman:

“Don’t be afraid, I haven’t come to kick your--, I have come to weep.”




THE COMIQUES September, 1846



Potier, having grown old, played at the Porte Saint Martin towards the
close of his life. He was the same in the street as he was on the stage.
Little boys would follow him, saying: “There is Potier!” He had a small
cottage near Paris and used to come to rehearsals mounted on a small
horse, his long thin legs dangling nearly to the ground.

Tiercelin was a Hellenist. Odry is a connoisseur of chinaware. The
elephantine Lepeintre junior runs into debt and lives the life of a
_coquin de neuveu_.

Alcide Tousez, Sainville and Ravel carry on in the green room just as
they do on the stage, inventing cock-and-bull yarns and cracking jokes.

Arnal composes classic verse, admires Samson, waxes wrath because the
cross has not been conferred upon him. And, in the green room, with
rouge on his nose and cheeks and a wig on his head, talks, between two
slaps in the face given or received, about Guizot’s last speech, free
trade and Sir Robert Peel; he interrupts himself, makes his entry upon
the stage, plays his part, returns and gravely resumes: “I was saying
that Robert Peel----”

Poor Arnal recently was driven almost insane. He had a mistress whom he
adored. This woman fleeced him. Having become rich enough she said to
him: “Our position is an immoral one and an end must be put to it. An
honest man has offered me his name and I am going to get married.” Arnal
was disconsolate. “I give you the preference,” said the belle, “marry
me.” Arnal is married. The woman left him and has become a bourgeoise.
Arnal nearly lost his reason through grief. This does not prevent him
from playing his pasquinades every night at the Vaudeville. He makes
fun of his ugliness, of his age, of the fact that he is pitted with
small-pox--laughs at all those things that prevented him from pleasing
the woman he loved, and makes the public laugh--and his heart is broken.
Poor red queue! What eternal and incurable sorrows there be in the
gaiety of a buffoon! What a lugubrious business is that of laughter!




MADEMOISELLE GEORGES. October, 23, 1867.



Mlle. George came to see me to-day. She was sad, and elegantly dressed
in a blue dress with white stripes. She said: “I am weary and disgusted.
I asked for Mars’ reversion. They granted me a pension of two thousand
francs which they do not pay. Just a mouthful of bread, and even that I
do not get a chance to eat! They wanted to engage me at the Historique
(at the Théâtre Historique). I refused. What could I do there among
those transparencies! A stout woman like me! Besides, where are the
authors? Where are the pieces? Where are the roles? As to the provinces,
I tried touring last year, but it is impossible without Harel.* I don’t
know how to manage actors. How do you think I can get on with these evil
doers? I was to have finished the 24th. I paid them on the 20th, and
fled. I returned to Paris to visit poor Harel’s tomb. It is frightful,
a tomb! It is horrible to see his name there on the stone! Yet I did not
weep. I was dry-eyed and cold. What a strange thing is life! To think
that this man who was so clever, so witty, should die an idiot! He
passed his days doing like this with his fingers. Not a spark of reason
remained. It is all over. I shall have Rachel at my benefit; I shall
play with her that chestnut “Iphigênie”. We shall make money, but I
don’t care. Besides, I’m sure she wouldn’t play Rodogune! I will also
play, if you will permit me, an act of “Lucrèce Borgia”. You see, I am
for Rachel; she is an artful one, if you like. See how she checkmates
those rascally French actors! She renews her engagements, assures for
herself pyrotechnics, vacations, heaps of gold. When the contract is
signed she says: “By the bye, I forgot to tell you that I have been
enceinte for four months; it will be five months before I am able to
play.” She does well. If I had done the same thing I shouldn’t have to
die like a dog on a litter of straw. Tragedians, you see, are comedians
after all. That poor Dorval, what has become of her, do you know? There
is one to be pitied, if you like! She is playing I know not where, at
Toulouse, at Carpentras, in barns, to earn her living! She is reduced
like me to showing her bald head and dragging her poor old carcass on
badly planed boards behind footlights of four tallow candles, among
strolling actors who have been to the galleys, or who ought to be there!
Ah! Monsieur Hugo, all this is nothing to you who are in good health and
well off, but we are poor miserable creatures!”

     *  M. Harel was manager of the Porte St. Martin Theatre.
     Mlle. Georges lived with him.




TABLEAUX VIVANTS



In the year 1846 there was a spectacle that caused a furore in Paris. It
was that afforded by women attired only in pink tights and a gauze skirt
executing poses that were called _tableaux vivants_, with a few men to
complete the groups. This show was given at the Porte Saint Martin and
at the Cirque. I had the curiosity one night to go and see the women
behind the scenes. I went to the Porte Saint Martin, where, I may add in
parentheses, they were going to revive “Lucrêce Borgia”. Villemot, the
stage manager, who was of poor appearance but intelligent, said: “I will
take you into the gynecium.”

A score of men were there--authors, actors, firemen, lamp lighters,
scene shifters--who came, went, worked or looked on, and in the midst of
them seven or eight women, practically nude, walked about with an air of
the most naïve tranquillity. The pink tights that covered them from the
feet to the neck were so thin and transparent that one could see not
only the toes, the navel, and the breasts, but also the veins and the
colour of the least mark on the skin on all parts of their bodies.
Towards the abdomen, however, the tights became thicker and only the
form was distinguishable. The men who assisted them were similarly
arranged. All these people were English.

At intervals of five minutes the curtain parted and they executed a
_tableau_. For this they were posed in immobile attitudes upon a large
wooden disc which revolved upon a pivot. It was worked by a child of
fourteen who reclined on a mattress beneath it. Men and women were
dressed up in chiffons of gauze or merino that were very ugly at a
distance and very ignoble _de prês_. They were pink statues. When the
disc had revolved once and shown the statues on every side to the public
crowded in the darkened theatre, the curtain closed again, another
tableau was arranged, and the performance recommenced a moment later.

Two of these women were very pretty. One resembled Mme. Rey, who played
the Queen in “Ruy Blas” in 1840; it was this one who represented Venus.
She was admirably shaped. Another was more than pretty: she was handsome
and superb. Nothing more magnificent could be seen than her black, sad
eyes, her disdainful mouth, her smile at once bewitching and haughty.
She was called Maria, I believe. In a tableau which represented “A Slave
Market,” she displayed the imperial despair and the stoical dejection
of a nude queen offered for sale to the first bidder. Her tights, which
were torn at the hip, disclosed her firm white flesh. They were, however
only poor girls of London. All had dirty finger nails.

When they returned to the green room they laughed as freely with the
scene shifters as with the authors, and talked broken French while they
adjusted all kinds of frightful rags upon their charming visages. Their
smile was the calm smile of perfect innocence or of complete corruption.