
EIGHTEENTH BOOK.


Returning to literary matters, I must bring forward a circumstance
which had great influence on the German poetry of this period, and
which is especially worthy of remark, because this very influence has
lasted through the history of our poetic art to the present day, and
will not be lost even in the future.

From the earlier times, the Germans were accustomed to rhyme; it had
this advantage in its favour, that one could proceed in a very naïve
manner, scarcely doing more than count the syllables. If with the
progress of improvement attention began more or less instinctively to
be paid also to the sense and signification of the syllables, this
was highly praiseworthy, and a merit which many poets contrived to
make their own. The rhyme was made to mark the close of the poetical
proposition; the smaller divisions were indicated by shorter lines, and
a naturally refined ear began to make provision for variety and grace.
But now all at once rhyme was rejected before it was considered that
the value of the syllables had net as yet been decided, indeed that it
was a difficult thing to decide. Klopstock took the lead. How earnestly
he toiled and what he has accomplished is well known. Every one felt
the uncertainty of the matter, many did not like to run a risk, and
stimulated by this natural tendency, they snatched at a poetic prose.
Gessner's extremely charming Idylls opened an endless path. Klopstock
wrote the dialogue of _Hermann's Schlucht_ (_Hermann's Battle_) in
prose, as well as _Der Tod Adams_ (_The Death of Adam_). Through the
domestic tragedies as well as the more classic dramas, a style more
lofty and more impassioned gained possession of the theatre; while,
on the other hand, the Iambic verse of five feet, which the example
of the English had spread among us, was reducing poesy to prose. But
in general the demand for rhythm and for rhyme could not be silenced.
Ramler, though proceeding on vague principles (as he was always severe
with respect to his own productions). Could not help exercising the
same severity upon those of others. He transformed prose into verse,
altered and improved the works of others, by which means he earned
little thanks and only confused the matter still more. Those succeeded
best who still conformed to the old custom of rhyme with a certain
observance of syllabic quantity, and who, guided by a natural taste,
observed laws though unexpressed and undetermined; as, for example,
Wieland, who, although inimitable, for a long time served as a model to
more moderate talents.

But still in any case the practice remained uncertain, and there was
no one, even among the best, who might not for the moment have gone
astray. Hence the misfortune, that this epoch of our poetic history, so
peculiarly rich in genius, produced little which, in its kind, could
be pronounced correct; for here also the time was stirring, advancing,
active, and calling for improvement, but not reflective and satisfying
its own requirements.

In order, however, to find a firm soil on which poetic genius might
find a footing,--to discover an element in which they could breathe
freely, they had gone back some centuries, where earnest talents were
brilliantly prominent amid a chaotic state of things, and thus they
made friends with the poetic art of those times. The Minnesingers
lay too far from us; it would have been necessary first to study the
language, and that was not our object, we wanted to five and not to
learn.

[Side-note: Hans Sachs.]

Hans Sachs, the really masterly poet, was one whom we could more
readily sympathise with. A man of true talent, not indeed like the
Minnesinging knights and courtiers, but a plain citizen, such as we
also boasted ourselves to be. A didactic realism suited us, and on many
occasions we made use of the easy rhythm, of the readily occurring
rhyme. His manner seemed so suitable to mere poems of the day, and to
such occasional pieces as we were called upon to write at every hour.

       *       *       *       *       *

If important works, which required the attention and labor of a year or
a whole life, were built, more or less, upon such hazardous grounds on
trivial occasions, it may be imagined how wantonly all other ephemeral
productions took their rise and shape; for example, the poetical
epistles, parables, and invectives of all forms, with which we went on
making war within ourselves, and seeks squabbling abroad.

Of this kind, besides what has already been printed, something, though
very little, survives; it may be laid up somewhere. Brief allusions
will suffice to reveal to thinking men their origin and purposes.
Persons of more than ordinary penetration, to whose sight these may
hereafter be brought, will be ready to observe that an honest purpose
lay at the bottom of all such eccentricities. An upright will revolts
against presumption, nature against conventionalities, talent against
forms, genius with itself, energy against indecision, undeveloped
capacity against developed mediocrity; so that the whole proceeding may
be regarded as a skirmish which follows a declaration of war, and gives
promise of a violent contest. For, strictly considered, the contest is
not yet fought out, in these fifty years; it is still going on, only in
a higher region.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Side-note: The "Hanswurst's Hochzeit."]

I had, in imitation of an old German puppet play, invented a wild
extravaganza, which was to bear the title of _Hanswurst's Hochzeit_
(_Jack Pudding's Wedding_).[1] The scheme was as follows:--Hanswurst,
a rich young farmer and an orphan, has just come of age, and wishes
to marry a rich maiden, named Ursel Blandine. His guardian, Kilian
Brustflech (_Leather apron_), and her mother Ursel, are highly pleased
with the purpose. Their long-cherished plans, their dearest wishes,
are at last fulfilled and gratified. There is not the slightest
obstacle, and properly the whole interest turns only upon this, that
the young people's ardour for their union is delayed by the necessary
arrangements and formalities of the occasion. As prologue, enters the
inviter to the wedding festivities, who proclaims the banns after the
traditional fashion, and ends with the rhymes:

    The wedding feast is at the house
    Of mine host of the Golden Louse.

To obviate the charge of violating the unity of place, the aforesaid
tavern, with its glittering insignia, was placed in the background of
the theatre; but so that all its four sides could be presented to
view, by being turned upon a peg; and as it was moved round, the front
scenes of the stage had to undergo corresponding changes.

In the first act the front of the house facing the street was turned to
the audience, with its golden sign magnified as it were by the solar
microscope; in the second act, the side towards the garden. The third
was towards a little wood; the fourth towards a neighboring lake; which
gave rise to a prediction that in aftertimes the decorator would have
little difficulty in carrying a wave over the whole stage up to the
prompter's box.

But all this does not as yet reveal the peculiar interest of the piece.
The principal joke which was carried out, even to an absurd length,
arose from the fact that the whole _dramatis personæ_ consisted of mere
traditional German nicknames, which at once brought out the characters
of the individuals, and determined their relations to one another.

As we would fain hope that the present book will be read aloud in good
society, and even in decent family circles, we cannot venture, after
the custom of every play-bill, to name our persons here in order,
nor to cite the passages in which they most clearly and prominently
showed themselves in their true colours; although, in the simplest way
possible, lively, roguish, broad allusions, and witty jokes, could
not but arise. We add one leaf as a specimen, leaving our editors the
liberty of deciding upon its admissibility.

Cousin Schuft (_scamp_), through his relationship to the family, was
entitled to an invitation to the feast; no one had anything to say
against it; for though he was a thoroughly good-for-nothing fellow, yet
there he was, and since he was there, they could not with propriety
leave him out; on such a feast-day, too, they were not to remember that
they had occasionally been dissatisfied with him.

With Master Schurke (_knave_), it was a still more serious case;
he had, indeed, been useful to the family, when it was to his own
profit; on the other hand, again, he had injured it, perhaps, in this
case, also with an eye to his own interests; perhaps, too, because he
found an opportunity. Those who were any ways prudent voted for his
admission; the few who would have excluded him, were out-voted.

But there was a third person, about whom it was still more difficult
to decide; an orderly man in society, no less than others, obliging,
agreeable, useful in many ways; he had the single failing, that he
could not bear his name to be mentioned, and as soon as he heard it,
was instantaneously transported into a heroic fury, like that which the
Northmen call _Berserker-rage_, attempted to kill all right and left,
and in his frenzy hurt others and received hurt himself; indeed the
second act of the piece was brought, through him, to a very perplexed
termination.

Here was an opportunity which 1 could not allow to pass, for chastising
the piratical publisher Macklot. He is introduced going about hawking
his Macklot wares, and when he hears of the preparation for the
wedding, he cannot resist the impulse to go spunging for a dinner,
and to stuff his ravening maw at other people's expense. He announces
himself; Kilian Brustflech inquires into his claims, but is obliged
to refuse him, since it was an understanding that all the guests
should be well known public characters, to which recommendation the
applicant can make no claim. Macklot does his best to show that he is
as renowned as any of them. But when Kilian Brustflech, as a strict
master of ceremonies, shows himself immoveable, the nameless person,
who has recovered from his Berserker-rage at the end of the second act,
espouses the cause of his near relative, the book-pirate, so urgently,
that the latter is finally admitted among the guests.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Side-note: The Stolbergs.]

About this time the COUNTS STOLBERG arrived at Frankfort; they were on
a journey to Switzerland, and wished to make us a visit. The earliest
productions of my dawning talent, which appeared in the Göttingen
_Musenalmanach_, had led to my forming a friendly relation with them,
and with all those other young men whose characters and labors are
now well known. At that time rather strange ideas were entertained of
friendship and love. They applied themselves to nothing more, properly
speaking, than a certain vivacity of youth, which led to a mutual
association and to an interchange of minds, full indeed of talent but
nevertheless uncultivated. Such a mutual relation, which looked indeed
like confidence, was mistaken for love, for genuine inclination; I
deceived myself in this as well as others, and have, in more than one
way, suffered from it many years. There is still in existence a letter
of Bürger's belonging to that time, from which it may be seen that,
among these companions, there was no question about the moral æsthetic.
Every one felt himself excited, and thought that he might act and
poetize accordingly.

The brothers arrived, bringing Count Haugwitz with them. They were
received by me with open heart, with kindly propriety. They lodged
at the hotel, but were generally with us at dinner. The first joyous
meeting proved highly gratifying; but troublesome eccentricities soon
manifested themselves.

A singular position arose for my mother. In her ready frank way, she
could carry herself back to the middle age at once, and take the part
of Aja with some Lombard or Byzantine princess. They called her nothing
else but Frau Aja, and she was pleased with the joke; entering the more
heartily into the fantasies of youth, as she believed she saw her own
portrait in the lady of Götz von Berlichingen.

But this could not last long. We had dined together but a few times,
when once, after enjoying glass after glass, our poetic hatred for
tyrants showed itself, and we avowed a thirst for the blood of such
villains. My father smiled and shook his head; my mother had scarcely
heard of a tyrant in her life, however she recollected having seen
the copperplate engraving of such a monster in Gottfried's Chronicle,
viz., King Cambyses, whom he describes as having shot with an arrow
the little son of an enemy through the heart, and boasting of his
deed to the father's face; this still stood in her memory. To give a
cheerful turn to the conversation which continually grew more violent,
she betook herself to her cellar, where her oldest wines lay carefully
preserved in large casks. There she had in store no less treasure than
the vintages of 1706, '19, '26, and '48, all under her own especial
watch and ward, which were seldom broached except on solemn festive
occasions.

As she set before us the rich-colored wine in the polished decanter,
she exclaimed: "Here is the true tyrant's blood! Glut yourselves with
this, but let all murderous thoughts go out of my house!"

"Yes, tyrants' blood indeed!" I cried; "there is no greater tyrant than
the one whose heart's blood is here set before you. Regale yourselves
with it; but use moderation! for beware lest he subdue you by his
spirit and agreeable taste. The vine is the universal tyrant who ought
to be rooted up; let us therefore choose and reverence as our patron
Saint the holy Lycurgus, the Thracian; he set about the pious work in
earnest, and though at last blinded and corrupted by the infatuating
demon Bacchus, he yet deserves to stand high in the army of martyrs
above.

"This vine-stock is the very vilest tyrant, at once an oppressor, a
flatterer, and a hypocrite. The first draughts of his blood are sweetly
relishing, but one drop incessantly entices another after it; they
succeed each other like a necklace of pearls, which one fears to pull
apart."

If any should suspect me here of substituting, as the best historians
have done, a fictitious speech for the actual address, I can only
express my regret that no short-hand writer had taken down this
peroration at once and handed it down to us. The thoughts would be
found the same, but the flow of the language perhaps more graceful and
attractive. Above all, however, in the present sketch, as a whole,
there is a want of that diffuse eloquence and fulness of youth, which
feels itself, and knows not whither its strength and faculty will carry
it.

[Side-note: The Stolbergs.]

In a city like Frankfort, one is placed in a strange position;
strangers continually crossing each other, point to every region of
the globe, and awaken a passion for travelling. On many an occasion
before now I had shown an inclination to be moving, and now at the
very moment when the great point was to make an experiment whether I
could renounce Lili--when a certain painful disquiet unfitted me for
all regular business, the proposition of the Stolbergs, that I should
accompany them to Switzerland, was welcome. Stimulated, moreover, by
the exhortations of my father, who looked with pleasure on the idea
of my travelling in that direction, and who advised me not to omit to
pass over into Italy, if a suitable occasion should offer itself, I at
once decided to go, and soon had everything packed for the journey.
With some intimation, but without leave-taking, I separated myself
from Lili; she had so grown into my heart, that I did not believe it
possible to part myself from her.

In a few hours I found myself with my merry fellow-travellers in
Darmstadt. Even at court we should not always act with perfect
propriety; here Count Haugwitz took the lead. He was the youngest of
us all, well formed, of a delicate, but noble appearance, with soft
friendly features, of an equable disposition, sympathizing enough, but
with so much moderation, that, contrasted with us, he appeared quite
impassible. Consequently, he had to put up with all sorts of jibes and
nicknames from them. This was all very well, so long as they believed
that they might act like children of nature; but as soon as occasion
called for propriety, and when one was again obliged, not unwillingly,
to put on the reserve of a Count, then he knew how to introduce and
to smoothe over everything, so that we always came off with tolerable
credit, if not with _éclat_.

I spent my time, meanwhile, with Merck, who in his Mephistophelist
manner looked upon my intended journey with an evil eye, and described
my companions, who had also paid him a visit, with a discrimination
that listened not to any suggestions of mercy. In his way he knew me
thoroughly; the naïve and indomitable good nature of my character was
painful to him; the everlasting purpose to take things as they are,
the live and let live was his detestation. "It is a foolish trick," he
said, "your going with these Burschen;" and then he would describe them
aptly, but not altogether justly. Throughout there was a want of good
feeling, and here I could believe that I could see further than he did,
although I did not in fact do this, but only knew how to appreciate
those ideas of their character, which lay beyond the circle of his
vision.

"You will not stay long with them!" was the close of all his remarks.
On this occasion I remember a remarkable saying of his, which he
repeated to me at a later time, which I had often repeated to myself,
and frequently found confirmed in life. "Thy striving," said he, "thy
unswerving effort is to give a poetic form to the real; others seek
to give reality to the so-called poetic, to the imaginative, and of
that nothing will ever come but stupid stuff." Whoever apprehends the
immense difference between these two modes of action, whoever insists
and acts upon this conviction, has reached the solution of a thousand
other things.

Unhappily, before our party left Darmstadt, an incident happened which
tended to verify beyond dispute the opinion of Merck.

Among the extravaganzas which grew out of the notion that we should
try to transport ourselves into a state of nature, was that of bathing
in public waters, in the open air; and our friends, after violating
every other law of propriety, could not forego this additional
unseemliness. Darmstadt, situated on a sandy plain, without running
water, had, it appeared, a pond in the neighbourhood, of which I
only heard on this occasion. My friends, who were hot by nature, and
moreover kept continually heating themselves, sought refreshment in
this pond. The sight of naked youths in the clear sunshine, might well
seem something strange in this region; at all events scandal arose.
Merck sharpened his conclusions, and I do not deny that I was glad to
hasten our departure.

On the way to Mannheim, in spite of all good and noble feelings which
we entertained in common, a certain difference in sentiment and conduct
already exhibited itself. Leopold Stolberg told us with much of feeling
and passion, that he had been forced to renounce a sincere attachment
to a beautiful English lady, and on that account had undertaken so
long a journey. When he received in return the sympathising confession
that we too were not strangers to such experiences, then he gave vent
without respect to the feelings of youth, declaring that nothing in the
world could be compared with his passion, his sufferings, or with the
beauty and amiability of his beloved. If by moderate observations we
tried, as is proper among good companions, to bring him duly to qualify
his assertion, it only made matters worse; and Count Haugwitz, as well
as I, were inclined at last to let the matter drop. When we had reached
Mannheim, we occupied pleasant chambers in a respectable hotel, and
after our first dinner there during the dessert, at which the wine was
not spared, Leopold challenged us to drink to the health of his fair
one, which was done noisily enough. After the glasses were drained, he
cried out: But now, out of goblets thus consecrated, no more drinking
must be permitted; a second health would be a profanation; therefore,
let us annihilate these vessels! and with these words he dashed the
wine-glass against the wall behind him. The rest of us followed his
example; and I imagined at the moment, that Merck pulled me by the
collar.

But youth still retains this trait of childhood, that it harbors no
malice against good companions; that its unsophisticated good nature
may be brushed somewhat roughly indeed, to be sure, but cannot be
permanently injured.

[Side-note: Klopstock.]

The glasses thus proclaimed angelical had considerably swelled our
reckoning, comforting ourselves, however, and determined to be merry,
we hastened for Carlsruhe, there to enter a new circle, with all
the confidence of youth and its freedom from care. There we found
Klopstock, who still maintained, with dignity, his ancient authority
over disciples who held him in reverence. I also gladly did homage
to him, so that when bidden to his court with the others, I probably
conducted myself tolerably well for a novice. One felt, too, in a
certain manner called upon to be natural and sensible at the same time.

The reigning Margrave, highly honored among the German Sovereigns as
one of their princely seniors, but more especially on account of the
excellent aims of his government, was glad to converse about matters
of political economy. The Margravine, active and well versed in the
arts and various useful branches of knowledge, was also pleased by some
graceful speeches to manifest a certain sympathy for us; for which
we were duly grateful, though when at home we could not refrain from
venting some severe remarks upon her miserable paper-manufactory, and
the favor she showed to the piratical bookseller Macklot.

The circumstance, however, of importance for me, was, that the
young duke of Saxe-Weimar had arrived here to enter into a formal
matrimonial engagement with his noble bride, the princess Louisa
of Hesse-Darmstadt; President von Moser had already arrived on the
same business, in order to settle this important contract with the
court-tutor Count Görtz, and fully to ratify it. My conversations
with both the high personages were most friendly, and at the farewell
audience, they both made me repeated assurances that it would be
pleasant to them to see me at Weimar.

Some private conversations with Klopstock, won me by the friendliness
they showed, and led me to use openness and candour with him. I
communicated to him the latest scenes of Faust, which he seemed to
approve of. Indeed, as I afterwards learned, he had spoken of them
to others with marked commendation, a thing not usual with him, and
expressed a wish to see the conclusion of the piece.

[Side-note: My Sister.]

Our former rudeness, though sometimes as we called it, our genius-like
demeanour, was kept, in something like a chaste restraint in
Carlsruhe, which is decent and almost holy ground. I parted from
my companions, as I had resolved to take a wide round and go to
Emmendingen, where my brother-in-law was high bailiff. I looked upon
this visit to my sister as a real trial. I knew that she had not a
happy existence, while there was no cause to find fault with her, with
her husband, or with circumstances. She was of a peculiar nature, of
which it is difficult to speak; we will endeavour, however, to set down
here whatever admits of being described.

A fine form was in her favor; but not so her features, which, although
expressing clearly enough, goodness, intelligence, and sensibility,
were nevertheless wanting in regularity and grace.

Add to this, that a high and strongly arched forehead, exposed still
more by the abominable fashion of dressing the hair back on the head,
contributed to leave a certain unpleasant impression, although it
bore the best testimony to her moral and intellectual qualities. I
can fancy, that if after the modern fashion, she had surrounded the
upper part of her face with curls, and clothed her temples and cheeks
with ringlets, she would have found herself more agreeable before the
mirror, without fear of displeasing others as well as herself. Then
there was the grave fault, that her skin was seldom clean, an evil
which from her youth up, by some demoniacal fatality, was most sure to
show itself on all festal occasions, and at concerts, balls, and other
parties.

In spite of these drawbacks she gradually made her way, however, as her
better and nobler qualities showed themselves more distinctly.

A firm character not easily controlled, a soul that sympathised and
needed sympathy, a highly cultivated mind, fine acquirements and
talents; some knowledge of languages and a ready pen--all these she
possessed--so that if she had been more richly favored with outward
charms, she would have been among the women most sought after in her
day.

Besides all this there is one strange thing to be mentioned: there was
not the slightest touch of sensual passion in her nature. She had grown
up with me, and had no other wish than to continue and pass her life
in this fraternal union. Since my return from the University we had
been inseparable; with the most unreserved confidence we shared all
our thoughts, feelings, and humors, and even the most incidental and
passing impressions of every accidental circumstance. When I went to
Wetzlar, the loneliness of the house without me seemed insupportable;
my friend Schlosser, neither unknown nor repugnant to the good girl,
stepped into my place. In him, unfortunately, the brotherly affection
changed into a decided, and to judge from his strictly conscientious
character, probably a first passion. Here there was found what people
call as good a match as could be wished, and my sister, after having
stedfastly rejected several good offers, but from insignificant men,
whom she always had an aversion to, allowed herself to be, I may well
say, talked into accepting him.

I must frankly confess that I have frequently indulged in fancies about
my sister's destiny, I did not like to think of her as the mistress of
a family, but rather as an Abbess, as the Lady Superior of some noble
community. She possessed every requisite for such a high position,
while she was wanting in all that the world deems indispensable in
its members. Over feminine souls she always exercised an irresistible
influence; young minds were gently attracted towards her, and she ruled
them by the spirit of her inward superiority. As she had in common
with me an universal tolerance for the good, the human, with all its
eccentricities, provided they did not amount to perversity, there was
mo need for seeking to conceal from her any idiosyncrasy which might
mark any remarkable natural talents, or for its owner feeling any
constraint in her presence; hence our parties, as we have seen before,
were always varied, free, ingenuous, and sometimes perhaps bordering
on boldness. My habit of forming intimacies with young ladies of a
respectful and obliging nature, without allowing any closer engagement
or relations to grow out of them, was mainly owing to my sister's
influence over me. And now the sagacious reader, who is capable of
reading into these lines what does not stand written in them, but is
nevertheless implied, will be able to form some conception of the
serious feelings with which I then set foot in Emmendingen.

But at my departure, after a short visit, a heavier load lay on my
heart, for my sister had earnestly recommended not to say enjoined
me, to break off my connection with Lili. She herself had suffered
much from along-protracted engagement; Schlosser, with his spirit
of rectitude, did not betroth himself to her, until he was sure of
his appointment under the Grand Duke of Baden; indeed, if one would
take it so, until he was actually appointed. The answer to his
application, however, was delayed in an incredible manner. If I may
express my conjecture on the matter, the brave Schlosser, able man
of business as he was, was nevertheless on account of his downright
integrity, desirable neither to the prince as a servant, immediately
in contact with himself, nor to the minister, who still less liked to
have so honest a coadjutor near to him. His expected and earnestly
desired appointment at Carlsruhe was never filled up. But the delay
was explained to me, when the place of Upper Bailiff in Emmendingen
became vacant, and he was instantly selected for it. Thus an office
of much dignity and profit was now intrusted to him, for which he had
shown himself fully competent. It seemed entirely suited to his taste,
his mode of action, to stand here alone to act according to his own
conviction, and to be held responsible for everything, whether for
praise or blame.

As no objections could be raised to his accepting this place, my sister
had to follow him, not indeed to a Court-residence, as she had hoped,
but to a place which must have seemed to her a solitude, a desert; to a
dwelling, spacious to be sure, with an official dignity, and stately,
but destitute of all chance of society. Some young ladies, with whom
she had cultivated an early friendship, followed her there, and as the
Gerock family was blessed with many daughters, these contrived to stay
with her in turn, so that, in the midst of such privation, she always
enjoyed the presence of at least one long-trusted friend.

These circumstances, these experiences, made her feel justified in
recommending to me, most earnestly, a separation from Lili. She thought
it hard to take such a young lady (of whom she had formed the highest
opinion) out of the midst of a lively, if not splendid circle, and to
shut her up in our old house, which, although very passable in its way,
was not suited for the reception of distinguished society, sticking
her, as it were, between a well-disposed, but unsociable, precise, and
formal father, and a mother extremely active in her domestic matters,
who, after the household business of the day was over would not like to
be disturbed over some notable bit of work by a friendly conversation
with forward and refined young girls. On the other hand, she in a
lively manner set Lili's position before me; for, partly in my letters,
partly in a confidential but impassioned conversation, I had told her
everything to a hair.

Unfortunately her conception was only a circumstantial and well-meant
completion of what a gossiping friend, in whom, by degrees, all
confidence ceased to be placed, had contrived by mentioning a few
characteristic traits to insinuate into her mind.

I could promise her nothing, although I was obliged to confess that she
had convinced me. I went on with that enigmatic feeling in my heart,
with which passion always nourishes itself; for the Child Cupid clings
obstinately to the garment of Hope, even when she is preparing with
long steps to flee away.

[Side-note: Schaffhausen--Zurich--Lavater.]

The only thing between this place and Zurich which I now clearly
remember, is the falls of the Rhine at Schaffhausen. A mighty cascade
here gives the indication of the mountainous region which we designed
to enter; where, each step becoming steeper and more difficult, we
should have laboriously to clamber up the heights.

The view of the lake of Zurich, which we enjoyed from the gate of the
"_Sword_," is still before me; I say from the gate of the tavern,
for, without stopping to enter it, I hastened to Lavater. He gave me
a cheerful and hearty reception, and was, I must confess, extremely
gracious; confiding, considerate, kind, and elevating was his bearing,
indeed, it would be impossible to expect anything else of him. His
wife, with somewhat singular, but serene tenderly pious expression of
countenance, fully harmonized, like everything else about him, with his
way of thinking and living.

Our first, and perhaps only theme of conversation, was his system of
Physiognomy. The first part of this remarkable work, was, if I mistake
not, already printed, or, at least, near its completion. It might be
said to be at once stamped with genius and yet empirical: methodical,
but still in its instances incomplete and partial. I was strangly
connected with it, Lavater wanted all the world for co-operators
and sympathizers. During his travels up the Rhine, he had portraits
taken of a great many distinguished men, in order to excite their
personal interest in a work in which they were to appear. He proceeded
in the same way with artists; he called upon every one to send him
drawings for illustrations. The latter came, and many were not exactly
suited for his purpose. So, too, he had copperplates engraved in all
parts, which seldom tinned out characteristic copies. Much labor had
been bestowed on his part; with money and exertions of all kinds an
important work was now ready, and full honor was done to Physiognomy.
But when in a great volume, illustrated by examples, Physiognomy,
founded on doctrine, was to set up its claims to the dignity of
science, it was found that not a single picture said what it ought to
say; all the plates had to be censured or to be taken with exceptions,
none to be praised, but only tolerated; many, indeed, were quite
altered by the explanations. For me, who in all my studies sought a
firm footing before I went further, I had now to perform one of the
most painful tasks which industry could be set to. Let the reader
judge. The manuscript, with impressions of the plates inserted was sent
to me at Frankfort. I was authorized to strike out whatever displeased
me, to change and put in what I liked. However I made a very moderate
use of this liberty. In one instance he had introduced a long and
violent piece of controversy against an unjust orator, which I left
out, and substituted a cheerful poem about nature; for this he scolded
me, but afterwards, when he had cooled down, approved of what I had
done.

Whoever turns over the four volumes of Physiognomy, and (what he will
not repent of) reads them, may conceive the interest there was in our
interviews, during which, as most of the plates contained in it were
already drawn and part of them had been engraved, we examined, and
decided on those fit to be inserted in the work, and considered the
ingenious means by which those, which did not exactly tally with its
principles, might be made instructive and suitable.

Whenever at present I look through the work of Lavater, a strange
comic, merry feeling comes over me; it seems as if I saw before me the
shadows of men formerly known to me, over whom I once fretted, and in
whom I find little satisfaction now.

The possibility, however, of retaining in some sort, much that
otherwise would have been unsuitable, was owing to the fine and
decided talent of the sketcher and engraver, Lips. He was, in fact,
born for the free prosaic representation of the actual, which was
precisely the thing wanted in this case. He worked under a singularly
exacting physiognomist, and therefore was obliged to look sharp to
approximate to the demands of his master; the clever peasant-boy felt
the whole responsibility of working for a clerical gentleman from a
city so highly privileged, and gave his best care to the business.

Living in a separate house from my companions, I became every day more
of a stranger to them, without the least unpleasant feeling having
arisen; our rural excursions were no longer made together, although in
the city we still kept up some intercourse. With all the arrogance of
young counts they had honored Lavater with a visit and appeared to the
skilful physiognomist somewhat different from what they did to the rest
of the world. He spoke to me about them, and I remember quite well,
that, speaking of Leopold Stolberg, he exclaimed: "I know not what you
all mean; he is a noble, excellent youth, and full of talent; but you
have described him to me as a hero, as a Hercules, and I have never in
my life seen a softer and more sensitive young man; nor, if need be,
one more easily influenced. I am still far from having formed a clear
physiognomical judgment of him, but as for you and all the rest, you
are in a fog altogether."

Since Lavater's journey on the Lower Rhine, the public interest in him
and his physiognomical studies had greatly increased; visitors of all
sorts crowded upon him, so that he felt in some sort embarrassed at
being looked upon as the first of spiritual and intellectual men, and
the chief point of attraction for strangers. Hence, to avoid envy and
all unpleasant feelings, he managed to remind and warn his visitors
that they must treat other distinguished men with friendship and
respect.

[Side-note: Visit to Bodmer.]

In this especial regard was had to the aged BODMER, and, accordingly,
we were compelled to visit him and pay our youthful respects to him. He
lived on a hill, above the large or old town, which lay on the right
bank, where the lake contracts its waters into the Limmat. We crossed
the old town, and, by a path that became steeper and steeper, at last
ascended the height behind the walls, where, between the fortifications
and the old wall, a pleasant suburb had sprang up, partly in
continuous and partly in detached houses, with a half country look. The
house where Bodmer had passed his whole life, stood in the midst of an
open and cheerful neighbourhood, which, the day being beautiful and
clear, we often paused on our road to survey with the greatest pleasure.

We were conducted up a flight of steps into a wainscoted chamber, where
a brisk old man, of middle stature, came to meet us. He received us
with his usual greeting to young visitors; telling us that we must
consider it an act of courtesy on his part to have delayed so long his
departure from this world in order that he might receive us kindly,
form our acquaintance, refresh himself with our talents, and wish us
joy in our future career.

We, on the other hand, congratulated him that, as a poet belonging to
the patriarchal world, he had yet in the neighbourhood of the most
highly cultivated city, possessed during his whole life a truly idyllic
dwelling, and, in the high free air, had enjoyed for so many long years
such a wide and beautiful prospect to feed his eyes with unfading
delight.

It seemed anything but displeasing to the old man when we asked
permission to take a view from his window of the neighbouring scenery;
and truly the prospect in the cheerful sunshine, and in the best season
of the year, appeared quite incomparable. The prospect commanded much
of the slope, from the great town down to the water's edge, as well
as the smaller town across the Limmat, and the whole of the fertile
Sihl-feld, towards the west. Behind us, on the left, was a part of
the lake of Zurich, with its bright rippled surface, and its shores
endlessly varying with alternating hill and valley and height after
height in greater variety than the eye could take in, which, dazzled
by this splendour, delighted to rest on the blue range of the loftier
mountains in the distance, whose snowy summits man has been so far
intimate with as to give names to.

The rapture of us young men at sight of the marvellous beauty which,
for so many years, had daily been before him, appeared to please the
old poet; he became, so to speak, ironically sympathizing, and we
parted the best of friends, but rot before a yearning for those blue
mountain heights had taken possession of our souls.

Now I am on the point of leaving our worthy patriarch, I remark,
for the first time, that I have as yet said nothing of his form and
countenance, of his movements, and his carriage and bearing.

In general, I do not think it quite right for travellers to describe
every distinguished man, whom they visit, as if they wanted to furnish
materials for advertising a runaway. No one sufficiently considers that
he has only looked at the great man during the moment of introduction,
and then only in his own way; and that according to the circumstances
of the moment the host may or not be what he seemed, proud or meek,
silent and talkative, cheerful or morose. In this particular case,
however, I may excuse myself from the attempt, by saying that no verbal
description of Bodmer's venerable person would convey an adequate
impression. Fortunately there exists a picture of him by Graff, of
Bause, which perfectly represents the man as he appeared to us, and,
indeed, exactly preserves his peculiar penetrating and reflective look.

[Side-note: Passavant--Lavater.]

A great, not indeed unexpected, but still highly coveted gratification
awaited me in Zurich, where I met my young friend, Passavant. Of a
respectable family of the reformed persuasion, and born in my native
city, he lived in Switzerland, at the fountain-head of the doctrine
which he was afterwards to proclaim as a preacher. With a frame not
large, but active, his face and his whole manner promised a quick and
agreeable resoluteness of character. His hair and beard were black, his
eyes lively. On the whole, you saw in him a man of some sensitiveness,
but of moderate energy.

Scarcely had we embraced one another and exchanged the first greeting,
when he immediately proposed to me to visit the smaller cantons. Having
himself already walked through them with great delight, he wished, with
the sight of them, to awaken my rapture and enthusiasm.

While I was talking over, with Lavater, the most interesting and
important points of our common business, until we had nearly exhausted
them, my lively fellow-travellers had already sallied forth in various
directions, and, in their own fashion, had examined the country.
Passavant, receiving and welcoming me with hearty friendship, believed
that he had gained thereby a right to the exclusive possession of my
society, and, therefore, in the absence of my companions, contrived
to entice me to the mountains, the more easily, since I was decidedly
inclined to accomplish the long desired ramble in quiet and at liberty
to follow my own whims. Without further deliberation, therefore, we
stepped into a boat and sailed up the glorious lake, on a fine clear
morning.

A poem inserted here may give the reader some intimation of those happy
moments:

    New draughts of strength and youthful blood,
      From this free world I've press'd;
    Here nature is so mild, so good--
      Who clasps me to her breast.
    The billows rock our little boat,
      The oars in measure beat,
    The hills, while clouds around them float,
      Approach our barque to meet.

    Eye, mine eye, why sink'st thou mourning?
    Golden dreams, are ye returning?
    Though thou'rt gold, thou dream, farewell;
    Here, too, life and love can dwell.

    Countless stars are blinking,
      In the waters here,
    On the mountains drinking
      Clouds of mist appear;
    Round the cool bay flying,
      Morning breezes wake,
    Ripen'd fruits are lying
      Mirror'd in the lake.

We landed in Richterswyl, where we had an introduction from Lavater to
Doctor HOTZE. As a physician, and a highly intelligent and benevolent
man, he enjoyed great esteem in his immediate neighbourhood and in the
whole country, and we can do no better honor to his memory than by
referring to a passage in Lavater's Physiognomy, which describes him.

After a very hospitable entertainment, which he relieved with a
highly agreeable and instructive conversation, describing to us the
next halting-places in our journey, we ascended the mountains which
lay before us. When we were about to descend again into the vale of
Schindellegi, we turned round to take in once more the charming
prospect over the lake of Zurich.

Of my feelings at that moment some idea may be gathered from the
following lines, which, just as I wrote them down, are still preserved
in a little memorandum book:

    Dearest Lili, if I did not love thee,
      I should revel in a scene like this!
    Yet, sweet Lili, if I did not love thee,
      What were any bliss?

This little impromptu seems to me more expressive in its present
context, than as it stands by itself in the printed collection of my
poems.

[Side-note: St. Mary's Hermitage.]

The rough roads, which led to St. Mary's hermitage, did not wear out
our good spirits. A number of pilgrims, whom we had remarked below
upon the lake, now overtook us and asked the aid of our prayers in
behalf of their pious object. We saluted them and let them pass,
and as they moved regularly with their hymns and prayers, they lent
a characteristic graceful animation to the dreary heights. We saw
livingly marked out the serpentine path which we too had to travel,
and seemed to be joyously following. The customs of the Romish church
are altogether significant and imposing to the Protestant, inasmuch
as he only recognises the inmost principle, by which they were first
called forth, the human element by which they are propagated from race
to race; thus penetrating at once to the kernel, without troubling
himself, just at the moment with the shell, the rind, or even with the
tree itself, its twigs, leaves, bark, and roots.

We now saw rising a dreary, treeless vale, the splendid church, the
cloister, of broad and stately compass, in the midst of a neat place of
sojourn for a large and varied assembly of guests.

The little church within the church, the former hermitage of the saint,
incrusted with marble, and transformed as far as possible into a
regular chapel, was something new to me; something that I had not seen,
this little vessel, surrounded and built over with pillars and vaults.
It could not but excite sober thoughts to reflect how a single spark of
goodness, and of the fear of God, had here kindled a bright and burning
flame, so that troops of believers, never ceased to make painful
pilgrimages in order to light their little tapers at this holy fire.
However the fact is to be explained, it plainly points at least to an
unbounded craving in man, for equal light, for equal warmth, with that
which this old hermit cherished and enjoyed in the deepest feeling and
the most secure conviction. We were shewn into the treasure chamber,
which was rich and imposing enough, and offered to the astonished eye
busts of the size of life, not to say colossal, of the saints and
founders of different orders.

A very different sort of feeling was awakened at the sight of a closet
opening upon this. It was filled with antique valuables here dedicated
and honored. My attention was fixed by various golden crowns of
remarkable workmanship, out of which I contemplated one exclusively. It
was a pointed crown, in the style of former days, such as one may have
seen in pictures on the heads of ancient queens, but of a most tasteful
design and of highly elaborate execution. The colored stones with which
it was studded were distributed over it or set opposite to each other,
with great effect and judgment; it was, in short, a work of that kind
which one would pronounce perfect at the first glance, without waiting
to bring out this impression by an appeal to the laws of art.

In such cases, where the art is not recognised, but felt, heart and
soul are turned towards the object, one would like to possess the
jewel, that one might impart pleasure to others with such a gift. I
begged permission to handle the little crown, and as I held it up
respectfully in my hand, I could not help thinking that I should like
to press it upon the bright, glittering locks of Lili, lead her before
the mirror, and witness her own joy in it, and the happiness which she
spread around her. I have often thought since, that this scene, if
realized by a skilful painter, would be highly touching and full of
meaning. It were worth one's while to be the young king to receive a
bride and a new kingdom in this way.

In order to show us all the treasures of the cloister, they led us into
a cabinet of natural and artificial curiosities. I had then but little
idea of the value of such things; at that time geognosy, which is so
commendable in itself, but which fritters away the impression produced
by the earth's beautiful surface on the mind's eye, had not begun to
entice me, still less had a fantastic geology entangled me in its
labyrinths. Nevertheless, the monk who acted as our guide, compelled
me to bestow some attention on a fossil, much prized as he said by
connoisseurs, a small wild boar's head well preserved in a lump of blue
fuller's clay, which, black as it was, has dwelt in my imagination ever
since. They had found it in the country of Rapperswyl, a district which
ever since the memory of man was so full of morasses, that it could
well receive and keep such mummies for posterity.

Far different attractions was presented to me by a copperplate
engraving of Martin Schön, which was kept under a glass frame, and
represented the Assumption of the Virgin. True, only a perfect specimen
could give an idea of the art of such a master; but then we are so
affected by it, as with the perfect in every branch of art, that we
cannot get rid of the wish to possess something in some way like it,
to be able constantly to repeat the sight of it, however long a time
may intervene. Why should I not anticipate and confess here, that
afterwards I could not rest until I had succeeded in obtaining an
excellent copy of this plate.

[Side-note: The Schwyzer-Haken.]

On the 16th of July, 1775 (for here I find a date first set down),
we entered upon a toilsome journey; wild stony heights were to be
surmounted, and that, too, in a perfect solitude and wilderness.
At a quarter before eight in the evening, we stood before the
Schwyzer-Haken, two mountain peaks which jut out boldly, side by side,
into the sky. For the first time we found snow upon our path, where
on the lagged rocks it had been hanging since the winter. A primeval
forest, with its solemn awe, filled the immense valleys, into which
we were about to descend. Refreshed, after a short rest, we sprang,
with bold and light step, from cliff to cliff, from ledge to ledge,
down the precipitous foot-path, and arrived by ten o'clock at Schwyz.
We had become at once weary yet cheerful, exhausted yet excited; we
eagerly quenched our violent thirst, and felt ourselves still more
inspired. Imagine the young man who but two years before had written
_Werther_, and his still younger friend who still earlier had read that
remarkable work in manuscript, and had been strangely excited by it,
had transported in some respect without their knowing it or wishing it,
into a state of nature, end there in the consciousness of rich powers,
vividly recalling past passions, clinging to those of the present,
shaping fruitless plans, rioting through the realm of fancy, and you
will be able to form some conception of our situation then, which I
should not know how to describe, if it did not stand written in my
journal: "Laughing and shouting lasted until midnight."

On the morning of the 17th, we saw the Schwyzer-Haken from our windows.
Around these vast and irregular natural pyramids, clouds rose upon
clouds. At one in the afternoon we left Schwyz, on our way to the Rigi;
at two we were on the Lawerzer lake, the sun shining brilliantly on it
and on us all the while. For sheer delight we saw nothing. Two stout
maidens guided the boat; that looked pretty, and we made no objection.
We arrived upon the island, on which they say once lived the former
lord of the castle; be this as it may, the hut of the anchorite has now
planted itself amidst the ruins.

We climbed the Rigi; at half-past seven we stood at the foot of the
"Mother of God" covered in snow; then passed the chapel and the
nunnery, and rested at the hotel of the Ox.

On the 18th, Sunday morning early, we took a sketch of the chapel
from the Ox. At twelve we went to Kaltenbad, or the fountain of the
Three Sisters. By a quarter after two we had reached the summit; we
found ourselves in the clouds, this time doubly disagreeable to us,
since they both hindered the prospect and drenched us with mist. But
when, here and there, they opened and showed us, framed as it were by
their ever-varying outline, a clear, majestic sun-lit world, with the
changing scenes of a diorama, we no longer lamented these accidents;
for it was a sight we had never seen before and should never behold
again, and we lingered long in this somewhat inconvenient position, to
catch, through the chinks and crevices of the ever-shifting masses of
cloud, some little point of sunny earth, some little strip of shore, or
pretty nook of the lake.

By eight in the evening we were back again at the door of the inn, and
refreshed ourselves with baked fish and eggs, and plenty of wine.

As the twilight and the night gradually came on, our ears were filled
with mysteriously harmonizing sounds; the twinkling of the chapel
bells, the splashing of the fountain, the rustling of changeful
breezes, with the horns of the foresters in the distance;--these were
blest, soothing, tranquillising moments.

[Side-note: William Tell.]

At half-past six, on the morning of the 19th, first ascending then
going down by the Waldstätter Lake we came to Fitznau; from thence, by
water, to Gersau. At noon, we were in the hotel on the lake. About two
o'clock we were opposite to Grütli, where the three Tells conspired;
then upon the flat rock where the hero sprang from his boat, and where
the legend of his life and deeds is recorded and immortalized by a
painting. At three we were at Flüelen, where he embarked; and at four
in Altorf, where he shot the apple.

Aided by this poetic thread one winds conveniently through the
labyrinth of these rocky walls which, descending perpendicularly to
the water, stand silently before us. They, the immovable, stand there
as quietly as the side-scenes of a theatre; success or failure, joy
or sorrow, merely pertain to the persons who for the day successively
strut upon the stage.

Such reflections, however, were wholly out of the circle of the vision
of the youths who then looked upon them; what had recently passed
had been dismissed from their thoughts, and the future lay before
them as strangely inscrutable, as the mountain region which they were
laboriously penetrating.

On the 20th, we breakfasted at Amstäg, where they cooked us a savoury
dinner of baked fish. Here now, on this mountain ledge, where the
Reuss, which was at all times wild enough, was rushing from rugged
clefts, and dashing the cool snow-water over the rocky channels, I
could not help enjoying the longed-for opportunity and refreshing
myself in the foaming waves.

At three o'clock we proceeded onwards; a row of sumpter-horses went
before us, we marched with them over a broad mass of snow, and did not
learn till afterwards, that it was hollow underneath. The snows of
winter, that had deposited themselves here in a mountain gorge, which
at other seasons it was necessary to skirt circuitously, now furnished
us with a shorter and more direct road. But the waters which forced
their way beneath had gradually undermined the snowy mass, and the mild
summer had melted more and more of the lower side of the vault, so
that now, like a broad arched bridge, it formed a natural connection
between the opposite sides. We convinced ourselves of this strange
freak of nature by venturing more than half way down into the broader
part of the gorge. As we kept ascending, we left pine forests in the
chasm, through which the Reuss from time to time appeared, foaming and
dashing over rocky precipices.

At half-past seven we arrived at Wasen, where, to render palatable the
red, heavy, sour Lombardy wine, we were forced to have recourse to
water, and to supply, by a great deal of sugar, the ingredient which
nature had refused to elaborate in the grape. The landlord showed us
some beautiful crystals; but I had, at that time, so little interest in
the study of nature and such specimens, that I did not care to burden
myself with these mountain products, however cheaply they might be
bought.

On the 21st, at half-past six, we were still ascending; the rocks grew
more and more stupendous and awful; the path to the _Teufelstein_
(Devil's Stone), from which we were to gain a view of the Devil's
Bridge, was still more difficult. My companion being disposed for a
rest, proposed me to sketch the most important views. My outlines were,
perhaps, tolerably successful, but nothing seemed to stand out, nothing
to retire into the distance; for such objects I had no language. We
toiled on further; the horrors of the wilderness seemed continually
to deepen, planes became hills, and hollows chasms. And so my guide
conducted me to the cave of Ursern, through which I walked in somewhat
of an ill humor; what we had seen thus far was, at any rate, sublime,
this darkness took everything away.

But the roguish guide anticipated the joyful astonishment which would
overwhelm me on my egress. There the moderately foaming stream wound
mildly through a level vale surrounded by mountains, but wide enough
to invite habitation. Above the clean little village of Ursern and its
church, which stood opposite to us on a level plot, rose a pine-grove
which was held sacred, because it protected the inhabitants at its
foot from the rolling of the avalanches. Here we enjoyed the sight of
long-missed vegetation. The meadows of the valley, just beginning to
look green, were adorned along the river side with short willows The
tranquillity was great; upon the level paths we felt our powers revive
again, and my fellow-traveller was not a little proud of the surprise
which he had so skilfully contrived.

The meadows produce the celebrated Ursern cheese, and the youthful
travellers, high in spirits, pronounced very tolerable wine not to be
surpassed in order to heighten their enjoyment, and to give a more
fantastic impulse to their projects.

On the 22nd, at half-past three, we left our quarters, that from the
smooth Ursern valley we might enter upon the stony valley of Liviner.
Here, too, we at once missed all vegetation; nothing was to be seen or
heard but naked or mossy rocks covered with snow, fitful gusts blowing
the clouds backwards and forwards, the rustling of waterfalls, the
tinkling of sumpter-horses in the depth of solitude, where we saw none
coming and none departing. It did not cost the imagination much to
see dragons' nests in the clefts. But, nevertheless, we felt inspired
and elevated by one of the most beautiful and picturesque waterfalls,
sublimely various in all its rocky steps, which, being at this time of
the year enriched by melted snows, and now half hidden by the clouds,
now half revealed, chained us for some time to the spot.

[Side-note: The Hospice.]

Finally, we came to little mist-lakes, as I might call them, since
they were scarcely to be distinguished from the atmospheric streaks.
Before long, a building loomed towards us out of the vapour: it was the
Hospice, and we felt great satisfaction at the thoughts of sheltering
ourselves under its hospitable roof.
