Chapter XVII SEPTEMBER, 1851.


_Sept. 1._ _Mikania scandens_, with its purplish white flowers, now
covering the button-bushes and willows by the side of the stream.
_Bidens chrysanthemoides_, large-flowered bidens, edge of river.
Various-colored polygonums standing high among the bushes and weeds by
riverside,—white and reddish and red.

Is not disease the rule of existence? There is not a lily pad floating
on the river but has been riddled by insects. Almost every shrub and
tree has its gall, oftentimes esteemed its chief ornament and hardly
to be distinguished from the fruit. If misery loves company, misery has
company enough. Now, at midsummer, find me a perfect leaf or fruit.

The fruit of the trilliums is very handsome. I found some a month ago,
a singular _red_, angular-cased pulp, drooping, with the old anthers
surrounding it three quarters of an inch in diameter; and now there
is another kind, a dense crowded cluster of many ovoid berries turning
from green to scarlet or bright brick-color. Then there is the mottled
fruit of the clustered Solomon’s-seal, and also the greenish (with blue
meat) fruit of the _Convallaria multiflora_ dangling from the axils of
the leaves.


_Sept. 2._ The dense fog came into my chamber early this morning,
freighted with light, and woke me. It was, no doubt, lighter at that
hour than if there had been no fog.

Not till after several months does an infant find its hands, and it
may be seen looking at them with astonishment, holding them up to the
light; and so also it finds its toes. How many faculties there are
which we have never found![325] Some men, methinks, have found only
their hands and feet. At least I have seen some who appeared never to
have found their heads, but used them only instinctively, as the negro
who butts with his,[326] or the water-carrier who makes a pack-horse of
his. They have but partially found their heads.

We cannot write well or truly but what we write with gusto. The body,
the senses, must conspire with the mind. Expression is the act of the
whole man, that our speech may be vascular. The intellect is powerless
to express thought without the aid of the heart and liver and of every
member. Often I feel that my head stands out too dry, when it should
be immersed. A writer, a man writing, is the scribe of all nature; he
is the corn and the grass and the atmosphere writing. It is always
essential that we love to do what we are doing, do it with a heart.
The maturity of the mind, however, may perchance consist with a certain
dryness.

There are flowers of thought, and there are leaves of thought; most of
our thoughts are merely leaves, to which the thread of thought is the
stem.

What affinity is it brings the goldfinch to the sunflower—both
yellow—to pick its seeds? Whatever things I perceive with my entire
man, those let me record, and it will be poetry. The sounds which
I hear with the consent and coincidence of all my senses, these are
significant and musical; at least, they only are heard.[327]

In a day or two the first message will be conveyed or transmitted over
the magnetic telegraph through this town, as a thought traverses space,
and no citizen of the town shall be aware of it. The atmosphere is full
of telegraphs equally unobserved. We are not confined to Morse’s or
House’s or Bain’s line.

Raise some sunflowers to attract the goldfinches, to feed them as well
as your hens. What a broad and loaded, bounteously filled platter of
food is presented this _bon-vivant_!

Here is one of those thick fogs which last well into the day. While the
farmer is concerned about the crops which his fields bear, I will be
concerned about the fertility of my human farm. I will watch the winds
and the rains as they affect the crop of thought,—the crop of crops,
ripe thoughts, which glow and rustle and fill the air with fragrance
for centuries. Is it a drought? How long since we had a rain? What is
the state of the springs? Are the low springs high?

I now begin to pluck wild apples.

The difference is not great between some fruits in which the worm is
always present and those gall fruits which were produced by the insect.

Old Cato says well, “_Patremfamilias vendacem, non emacem, esse
oportet_.” These Latin terminations express better than any English
that I know the greediness, as it were, and tenacity of purpose with
which the husbandman and householder is required to be a seller and not
a buyer,—with mastiff-like tenacity,—these _lipped_ words, which, like
the lips of moose and browsing creatures, gather in the herbage and
twigs with a certain greed. This termination _cious_ adds force to a
word, like the lips of browsing creatures, which greedily collect what
the jaw holds; as in the word “tenacious” the first half represents
the kind of jaw which holds, the last the lips which collect. It can
only be pronounced by a certain opening and protruding of the lips;
so “avaricious”. These words express the sense of their simple roots
with the addition, as it were, of a certain lip greediness. Hence
“capacious” and “capacity,” “emacity.” When these expressive words are
used, the hearer gets something to chew upon. To be a seller with the
tenacity and firmness and steadiness of the jaws which hold and the
greediness of the lips which collect. The audacious man not only dares,
but he greedily collects more danger to dare. The avaricious man not
only desires and satisfies his desire, but he collects ever new browse
in anticipation of his ever-springing desires. What is _luscious_ is
especially enjoyed by the lips. The mastiff-mouthed are tenacious. To
be a seller with mastiff-mouthed tenacity of purpose, with moose-lipped
greediness,—ability to browse! To be edacious and voracious is to be
not nibbling and swallowing merely, but eating and swallowing while the
lips are greedily collecting more food.

There is a reptile in the throat of the greedy man always thirsting
and famishing. It is not his own natural hunger and thirst which he
satisfies.

The more we know about the ancients, the more we find that they were
like the moderns. When I read Marcus Cato De Re Rustica, a small
treatise or Farmer’s Manual of those days, fresh from the field
of Roman life, all reeking with and redolent of the life of those
days, containing more indirect history than any of the histories of
Rome of direct,—all of that time but that time,—_here_ is a simple,
direct, pertinent word addressed to the Romans. And where are _the
Romans_? Rome and the Romans are commonly a piece of rhetoric. As
if New England had disappeared poetically and there were left Buel’s
“Farmer’s Companion,” or the letters of Solon Robinson, or a volume
of extracts from the _New England Farmer_. Though the Romans are no
more but a fable and an ornament of rhetoric, we have here their _New
England Farmer_, the very manual those Roman farmers read, speaking as
if they were to hear it, its voice not silenced, as if Rome were still
the mistress of the world,—as fresh as a dripping dish-cloth from a
Roman kitchen.[328] As when you overhaul the correspondence of a man
who died fifty years ago, with like surprise and feelings you overhaul
the manuscripts of the Roman nation. There exist certain old papers,
manuscripts, either the originals or faithful and trustworthy old
copies of the originals, which were left by the Roman people. They have
gone their way, but these old papers of all sorts remain. Among them
there are some farm journals, or farm books; just such a collection of
diary and memorandum—as when the cow calved, and the dimensions, with
a plan, of the barn, and how much paid to Joe Farrar for work done on
the farm, etc., etc.—as you might find in an old farmer’s pocket-book
to-day.

Indeed the farmer’s was pretty much the same routine then as now.
Cato says: “Sterquilinium magnum stude ut habeas. Stercus sedulo
conserva, cum exportabis purgato et comminuito. Per autumnum evehito.”
(Study to have a great dungheap. Carefully preserve your dung, when
you carry it out, make clean work of it and break it up fine. Carry
it out during the autumn.) Just such directions as you find in the
“Farmer’s Almanack” to-day. It reminds me of what I see going on in our
fields every autumn. As if the farmers of Concord were obeying Cato’s
directions. And Cato but repeated the maxims of a remote antiquity.
Nothing can be more homely and suggestive of the every-day life of the
Roman agriculturalists, thus supplying the very deficiencies in what is
commonly called Roman history, _i. e._ revealing to us the actual life
of the Romans, the how they got their living and what they did from day
to day.[329]

They planted _rapa_, _raphanos_, _milium_, and _panicum_ in low foggy
land, _ager nebulosus_.

I see the farmer now—_i. e._ I shall in autumn—on every side carting
out his manure and sedulously making his compost-heap, or scattering
it over his grass ground and breaking it up with a mallet; and it
reminds me of Cato’s advice. He died one hundred and fifty years before
Christ.[330] Before Christianity was heard of, this was done. A Roman
family appears to have had a great supply of tubs and kettles.

A fire in the sitting-room to-day. Walk in the afternoon by Walden road
and railroad to Minn’s place, and round it to railroad and home. The
first coolness is welcome, so serious and fertile of thought. My skin
contracts, and I become more continent. Carried umbrellas, it mizzling.
As in the night, now in the rain, I smell the fragrance of the woods.
The prunella leaves have turned a delicate claret or lake color by the
roadside. I am interested in these revolutions as much as in those of
kingdoms. Is there not tragedy enough in the autumn? Walden seems to
be going down at last. The pines are dead and leaning, red and half
upset, about its shore. Thus, by its rising once in twenty-five years,
perchance, it keeps an open shore, as if the ice had heaved them over.
Found the succory at Minn’s Bridge on railroad and beyond. Query: May
not this and the tree-primrose and other plants be distributed from
Boston on the rays of the railroads, the seeds mixing with the grains
and all kinds of dirt and being blown from the passing freight-cars?
The feathery-tailed fruit of the fertile flowers of the clematis
conspicuous now.

The shorn meadows looked of a living green as we came home at eve,
even greener than in spring. The _faenum cordum_, the aftermath,
_sicilimenta de prato_, the second mowings of the meadow, this reminds
me of, in Cato.[331]


_Sept. 3._ Why was there never a poem on the cricket? Its creak
seems to me to be one of the most prominent and obvious facts in the
world, and the least heeded. In the report of a man’s contemplations
I look to see somewhat answering to this sound.[332] When I sat on
Lee’s Cliff the other day (August 29th), I saw a man working with a
horse in a field by the river, carting dirt; and the horse and his
relation to him struck me as very remarkable. There was the horse, a
mere animated machine,—though his tail was brushing off the flies,—his
whole existence subordinated to the man’s, with no tradition, perhaps
no instinct, in him of independence and freedom, of a time when he was
wild and free,—completely humanized. No compact made with him that he
should have the Saturday afternoons, or the Sundays, or any holidays.
His independence never recognized, it being now quite forgotten both
by men and by horses that the horse was ever free. For I am not aware
that there are any wild horses known surely not to be descended from
tame ones. Assisting that man to pull down that bank and spread it over
the meadow; only keeping off the flies with his tail, and stamping,
and catching a mouthful of grass or leaves from time to time, on his
own account,—all the rest for man. It seemed hardly worth while that
he should be _animated_ for this. It was plain that the man was not
educating the horse; not trying to develop his nature, but merely
getting work out of him. That mass of animated matter seemed more
completely the servant of man than any inanimate. For slaves have their
holidays; a heaven is conceded to them, but to the horse none. Now
and forever he is man’s slave. The more I considered, the more the man
seemed akin to the horse; only his was the stronger will of the two.
For a little further on I saw an Irishman shovelling, who evidently was
as much tamed as the horse. He had stipulated that to a certain extent
his independence be recognized, and yet really he was but little more
independent. I had always instinctively regarded the horse as a free
people somewhere, living wild. Whatever has not come under the sway of
man is wild. In this sense original and independent men are wild,—not
tamed and broken by society. Now for my part I have such a respect for
the horse’s nature as would tempt me to let him alone; not to interfere
with him,—his walks, his diet, his loves. But by mankind he is treated
simply as if he were an engine which must have rest and is sensible
of pain. Suppose that every squirrel were made to turn a coffee-mill!
Suppose that the gazelles were made to draw milk-carts!

There he was with his tail cut off, because it was in the way, or to
suit the taste of his owner; his mane trimmed, and his feet shod with
iron that he might wear longer. What is a horse but an animal that has
lost its liberty? What is it but a system of slavery? and do you not
thus by _insensible_ and unimportant degrees come to human slavery?
Has lost its liberty!—and has man got any more liberty himself for
having robbed the horse, or has he lost just as much of his own, and
become more like the horse he has robbed? Is not the other end of the
bridle in this case, too, coiled round his own neck? Hence stable-boys,
jockeys, all that class that is daily transported by fast horses. There
he stood with his oblong square figure (his tail being cut off) seen
against the water, brushing off the flies with his tail and stamping,
braced back while the man was filling the cart.[333]

It is a very remarkable and significant fact that, though no man is
quite well or healthy, yet every one believes practically that health
is the rule and disease the exception, and each invalid is wont to
think himself in a minority, and to postpone somewhat of endeavor to
another state of existence. But it may be some encouragement to men to
know that in this respect they stand on the same platform, that disease
is, in fact, the _rule_ of our terrestrial life and the prophecy of a
_celestial_ life. Where is the coward who despairs because he is sick?
Every one may live either the life of Achilles or of Nestor. Seen in
this light, our life with all its diseases will look healthy, and in
one sense the more healthy as it is the more diseased. Disease is not
the accident of the individual, nor even of the generation, but of
life itself. In some form, and to some degree or other, it is one of
the permanent conditions of life. It is, nevertheless, a cheering fact
that men affirm health unanimously, and esteem themselves miserable
failures. Here was no blunder. They gave us life on exactly these
conditions, and methinks we shall live it with more heart when we
perceive clearly that these are the terms on which we have it. Life
is a warfare, a struggle, and the diseases of the body answer to the
troubles and defeats of the spirit. Man begins by quarrelling with the
animal in him, and the result is immediate disease. In proportion as
the spirit is the more ambitious and persevering, the more obstacles
it will meet with. It is as a seer that man asserts his disease to be
exceptional.[334]

       *       *       *       *       *

2 P. M.—To Hubbard’s Swimming-Place and Grove in rain.

As I went under the new telegraph-wire, I heard it vibrating like a
harp high overhead. It was as the sound of a far-off glorious life, a
supernal life, which came down to us, and vibrated the lattice-work of
this life of ours.[335]

The melons and the apples seem at once to feed my brain.

Here comes a laborer from his dinner to resume his work at clearing
out a ditch notwithstanding the rain, remembering as Cato says, _per
ferias potuisse fossas veteres tergeri_, that in the holidays old
ditches might have been cleared out. One would think that I were the
paterfamilias come to see if the steward of my farm has done his duty.

The ivy leaves are turning red. Fall dandelions stand thick in the
meadows.

How much the Roman must have been indebted to his agriculture, dealing
with the earth, its clods and stubble, its dust and mire. Their farmer
consuls were their glory, and they well knew the farm to be the nursery
of soldiers. Read Cato to see what kind of legs the Romans stood on.

The leaves of the hardhack are somewhat appressed, clothing the stem
and showing their downy under sides like white, waving wands. Is it
peculiar to the season, or the rain,—or the plant?

Walk often in drizzly weather, for then the small weeds (especially
if they stand on bare ground), covered with rain-drops like beads,
appear more beautiful than ever,—the hypericums, for instance. They
are equally beautiful when covered with dew, fresh and adorned, almost
spirited away, in a robe of dewdrops.[336]

Some farmers have begun to thresh and winnow their oats.

Identified spotted spurge (_Euphorbia maculata_), apparently out of
blossom. Shepherd’s-purse and chickweed.

As for walking, the inhabitants of large English towns are confined
almost exclusively to their parks and to the highways. The few
footpaths in their vicinities “are gradually vanishing,” says
Wilkinson, “under the encroachments of the proprietors.” He proposes
that the people’s right to them be asserted and defended and that
they be kept in a passable state at the public expense. “This,”
says he, “would be easily done by means of asphalt laid upon a good
foundation”!!! So much for walking, and the prospects of walking, in
the neighborhood of English large towns.

Think of a man—he may be a genius of some kind—being confined to
a highway and a park for his world to range in! I should die from
mere nervousness at the thought of such confinement. I should
hesitate before I were born, if those terms could be made known to me
beforehand. Fenced in forever by those green barriers of fields, where
gentlemen are seated! Can they be said to be inhabitants of this globe?
Will they be content to inhabit heaven thus partially?


_Sept. 4._ 8 A. M.—A clear and pleasant day after the rain. Start
for Boon’s Pond in Stow with C. Every sight and sound was the more
interesting for the clear atmosphere. When you are starting away,
leaving your more familiar fields, for a little adventure like a
walk, you look at every object with a traveller’s, or at least with
historical, eyes; you pause on the first bridge, where an ordinary walk
hardly commences, and begin to observe and moralize like a traveller.
It is worth the while to see your native village thus sometimes, as if
you were a traveller passing through it, commenting on your neighbors
as strangers.[337] We stood thus on Wood’s Bridge, the first bridge,
in the capacity of pilgrims and strangers to its familiarity, giving
it one more chance with us, though our townsmen who passed may not have
perceived it.

There was a pretty good-sized pickerel poised over the sandy bottom
close to the shore and motionless as a shadow. It is wonderful how they
resist the slight current of our river and remain thus stationary for
hours. He, no doubt, saw us plainly on the bridge,—in the sunny water,
his whole form distinct and his shadow,—motionless as the steel trap
which does not spring till the fox’s foot has touched it.

—— ——’s dog sprang up, ran out, and growled at us, and in his eye I
seemed to see the eye of his master. I have no doubt but that, as is
the master, such in course of time tend to become his herds and flocks
as well as dogs. One man’s oxen will be clever and solid, another’s
mischievous, another’s mangy,—in each case like their respective
owners. No doubt man impresses his own character on the beasts which
he tames and employs; they are not only humanized, but they acquire
his particular human nature.[338] How much oxen are like farmers
generally, and cows like farmers’ wives! and young steers and heifers
like farmers’ boys and girls! The farmer acts on the ox, and the ox
reacts on the farmer. They do not meet half-way, it is true, but they
do meet at a distance from the centre of each proportionate to each
one’s intellectual power.[339] The farmer is ox-like in his thought, in
his walk, in his strength, in his trustworthiness, in his taste.[340]

Hosmer’s man was cutting his millet, and his buckwheat already lay in
_red_ piles in the field.

The first picture we noticed was where the road turned among the pitch
pines and showed the Hadley house, with the high wooded hill behind
with dew and sun on it, the gracefully winding road path, and a more
distant horizon on the right of the house. Just beyond, on the left,
it was pleasant walking where the road was shaded by a high hill, as
it can be only in the morning. Even in the morning that additional
coolness and early-dawn-like feeling of a more sacred and earlier
season are agreeable.

The lane in front of Tarbell’s house, which is but little worn and
appears to lead nowhere, though it has so wide and all-engulfing an
opening, suggested that such things might be contrived for effect in
laying out grounds. (Only those things are sure to have the greatest
and best effect, which like this were not contrived for the sake of
effect.) An open path which would suggest walking and adventuring on
it, the going to some place strange and far away. It would make you
think of or imagine distant places and spaces greater than the estate.

It was pleasant, looking back just beyond, to see a heavy shadow (made
by some high birches) reaching quite across the road. Light and shadow
are sufficient contrast and furnish sufficient excitement when we are
well.

Now we were passing the vale of Brown and Tarbell, a sunshiny mead
pastured by cattle and sparkling with dew, the sound of crows and
swallows heard in the air, and leafy-columned elms seen here and there
shining with dew. The morning freshness and unworldliness of that
domain![341] The vale of Tempe and of Arcady is not farther off than
are the conscious lives of men from their opportunities. Our life is
as far from corresponding to its scenery as we are distant from Tempe
and Arcadia; that is to say, they are far away because we are far from
living natural lives. How absurd it would be to insist on the vale of
Tempe in particular when we have such vales as we have!

In the Marlborough road, in the woods, I saw a purple streak like
a stain on the red pine leaves and sand under my feet, which I was
surprised to find was made by a dense mass of purple fleas, somewhat
like snow-fleas,—a faint purple stain as if some purple dye had been
spilt. What is that slender pink flower that I find in the Marlborough
road,—smaller than a snapdragon? The slender stems of grass which hang
over the ruts and horses’ path in this little-frequented road are so
laden with dew that I am compelled to hold a bush before me to shake it
off. The jays scream on the right and left and are seen flying further
off as we go by.

We drink in the meadow at Second Division Brook, then sit awhile to
watch its yellowish pebbles and the cress (?) in it and other weeds.
The ripples cover its surface like a network and are faithfully
reflected on the bottom. In some places, the sun reflected from ripples
on a flat stone looks like a golden comb. The whole brook seems as
busy as a loom: it is a woof and warp of ripples; fairy fingers are
throwing the shuttle at every step, and the long, waving brook is the
fine product. The water is wonderfully clear.

To have a hut here, and a footpath to the brook! For roads, I think
that a poet cannot tolerate more than a footpath through the fields;
that is wide enough, and for purposes of winged poesy suffices. It
is not for the muse to speak of cart-paths. I would fain travel by a
footpath round the world.[342] I do not ask the railroads of commerce,
not even the cart-paths of the farmer. Pray, what other path would you
have than a footpath? What else should wear a path? This is the track
of man alone. What more suggestive to the pensive walker?[343] One
walks in a wheel-track with less emotion; he is at a greater distance
from man; but this footpath was, perchance, worn by the bare feet of
human beings, and he cannot but think with interest of them.

The grapes, though their leaves are withering and falling, are yet too
sour to eat.

In the summer we lay up a stock of experiences for the winter, as the
squirrel of nuts,—something for conversation in winter evenings. I love
to think then of the more distant walks I took in summer.[344]

At the powder-mills the carbonic acid gas in the road from the building
where they were making charcoal made us cough for twenty or thirty
rods.

Saw some gray squirrels whirling their cylinder by the roadside. How
fitted that cylinder to this animal! “A squirrel is easily taught to
turn his cylinder” might be a saying frequently applicable. And as
they turned, one leaped over or dodged under another most gracefully
and unexpectedly, with interweaving motions. It was the circus and
menagerie combined. So human they were, exhibiting themselves.

In the Marlborough road, I forgot to say, we brushed the _Polygonum
articulatum_ with its spikes of reddish-white flowers, a slender and
tender plant which loves the middle of dry and sandy not-much-travelled
roads. To find that the very atoms bloom, that there are flowers we
rudely brush against which only the microscope reveals!

It is wise to write on many subjects, to try many themes, that so
you may find the right and inspiring one. Be greedy of occasions
to express your thought. Improve the opportunity to draw analogies.
There are innumerable avenues to a perception of the truth. Improve
the suggestion of each object however humble, however slight and
transient the provocation. What else is there to be improved? Who knows
what opportunities he may neglect? It is not in vain that the mind
turns aside this way or that: follow its leading; apply it whither it
inclines to go. Probe the universe in a myriad points. Be avaricious
of these impulses. You must try a thousand themes before you find the
right one, as nature makes a thousand acorns to get one oak. He is a
wise man and experienced who has taken many views; to whom stones and
plants and animals and a myriad objects have each suggested something,
contributed something.[345]

And now, methinks, this wider wood-path[346] is not bad, for it admits
of society more conveniently. Two can walk side by side in it in the
ruts, aye, and one more in the horse-track.[347] The Indian walked in
single file, more solitary,—not side by side, chatting as he went. The
woodman’s cart and sled make just the path two walkers want through the
wood.

Beyond the powder-mills we watched some fat oxen, elephantine,
behemoths,—one Rufus-Hosmer-eyed, with the long lash and projecting
eye-ball.

Now past the paper-mills, by the westernmost road east of the river,
the first new ground we’ve reached.

Not only the prunella turns _lake_, but the _Hypericum Virginicum_ in
the hollows by the roadside,—a handsome blush. A part of the autumnal
tints, ripe leaves. Leaves acquire red blood. Red colors touch our
blood, and excite us as well as cows and geese.

And now we leave the road and go through the woods and swamps toward
Boon’s Pond, crossing two or three roads and by Potter’s house in Stow;
still on east of river. The fruit of the _Pyrola rotundifolia_ in the
damp woods. Larch trees in Stow about the houses. Beyond Potter’s we
struck into the extensive wooded plain where the ponds are found in
Stow, Sudbury, and Marlborough. Part of it called Boon’s Plain.[348]
Boon said to have lived on or under Bailey’s Hill at west of pond.
Killed by Indians between Boon[’s Pond] and White’s Pond as he was
driving his ox-cart. The oxen ran off to Marlborough garrison-house.
His remains have been searched for. A sandy plain, a large level tract.
The pond shores handsome enough, but water shallow and muddy looking.
Well-wooded shores. The maples begin to show red about it. Much fished.

Saw a load of sunflowers in a farmers [_sic_]. Such is the destiny of
this large, coarse flower; the farmers gather it like pumpkins.

Returned by railroad down the Assabet. A potato-field yellow with
wild radish. But no good place to bathe for three miles, Knight’s
new dam has so raised the river. A permanent freshet, as it were, the
fluviatile trees standing dead for fish hawk perches, and the water
stagnant for weeds to grow in. You have only to dam up a running stream
to give it the aspect of a dead stream, and to some degree restore its
primitive wild appearance. Tracts made inaccessible to man and at the
same time more fertile. Some speculator comes and dams up the stream
below, and lo! the water stands over all meadows, making impassable
morasses and dead trees for fish hawks,—a wild, stagnant, fenny
country, the last gasp of wildness before it yields to the civilization
of the factory,—to cheer the eyes of the factory people and educate
them. It makes a little wilderness above the factories.

The woodbine now begins to hang red about the maples and other trees.

As I looked back up the stream from near the bridge (I suppose on the
road from Potter’s house to Stow), I on the railroad, I saw the ripples
sparkling in the sun, reminding me of the sparkling icy fleets which
I saw last winter; and I saw how one corresponded to the other, ice
waves to water ones; the erect ice-flakes were the waves stereotyped.
It was the same sight, the reflection of the sun sparkling from a
myriad slanting surfaces at a distance, a rippled water surface or a
crystallized frozen one.

  [Illustration]

Here crossed the river and climbed the high hills on the west side.
The walnut trees conformed in their branches to the slope of the hill,
being just as high from the ground on the upper side as on the lower.

On all sides now I see and smell the withering leaves of brush that has
been cut to clear the land. I see some blackened tracts which have been
burnt over. It is remarkable, for it is rare to see the surface of the
earth black. And in the horizon I can see the smokes of several fires.
The farmers improve this season, which is the driest, their haying
being done and their harvest not begun, to do these jobs,—burn brush,
build walls, dig ditches, cut turf. This is what I find them doing all
over the country now; also topping corn and digging potatoes.

Saw quite a flock, for the first time, of goldfinches.

On the high, round hills in the east and southeast of Stow,—perchance
they are called the Assabet Hills,—rising directly from the river. They
are the highest I know rising thus. The rounded hills of Stow. A hill
and valley country. Very different from Concord.

It had been a warm day, especially warm to the head. I do not perspire
as in the early summer, but am sensible of the ripening heat, more as
if by contact. Suddenly the wind changed to east, and the atmosphere
grew more and more hazy and thick on that side, obstructing the view,
while it was yet clear in the west. I thought it was the result of the
cooler air from over the sea meeting and condensing the vapor in the
warm air of the land. That was the haze, or thin, dry fog which some
call smoke. It gradually moved westward and affected the prospect on
that side somewhat. It was a very thin fog invading all the east. I
felt the cool air from the ocean, and it was very refreshing. I opened
my bosom and my mouth to inhale it. Very delicious and invigorating.

We sat on the top of those hills looking down on the new brick
ice-house. Where there are several hills near together, you cannot
determine at once which is the highest, whether the one you are on or
the next. So, when great men are assembled, each yields an uncertain
respect to the other, as if it were not certain whose crown rose
highest.

Under the nut trees on these hills, the grass is short and green as if
grazed close by cattle who had stood there for shade, making a distinct
circular yard. Yet, as there is no dung and the form corresponds so
closely to the tree, I doubt if that can be the cause.

On hillside north of river above powder-mills the _Pycnanthemum
incanum_ (mountain mint, calamint) and the _Lespedeza violacea_.

Saw what I thought a small red dog in the road, which cantered along
over the bridge this side the powder-mills and then turned into the
woods. This decided me—this turning into the woods—that it was a fox.
The dog of the woods, the dog that is more at home in the woods than in
the roads and fields. I do not often see a dog turning into the woods.

Some large white (?) oak acorns this side the last-named bridge. A
few oaks stand in the pastures still, great ornaments. I do not see
any young ones springing up to supply their places. Will there be any
a hundred years hence? These are the remnants of the primitive wood,
methinks. We are a young people and have not learned by experience the
consequence of cutting off the forest. One day they will be planted,
methinks, and nature reinstated to some extent.

I love to see the yellow knots and their lengthened stain on the dry,
unpainted pitch[?]-pine boards on barns and other buildings,—the Dugan
house, for instance. The indestructible yellow fat! it fats my eyes to
see it; worthy for art to imitate, telling of branches in the forest
once.


_Sept 5._ No doubt, like plants, we are fed through the atmosphere,
and the varying atmospheres of various seasons of the year feed us
variously. How often we are sensible of being thus fed and invigorated!
And all nature contributes to this aerial diet its food of finest
quality. Methinks that in the fragrance of the fruits I get a finer
flavor, and in beauty (which is appreciated by sight—the taste and
smell of the eye) a finer still. As Wilkinson says, “the physical man
himself is the builded aroma of the world. This then, at least, is the
office of the lungs—to drink the atmosphere with the planet dissolved
in it.” “What is the import of _change of air_, and how each pair of
lungs has a _native air_ under some one dome of the sky.”

Wilkinson’s book to some extent realizes what I have dreamed of,—a
return to the primitive analogical and derivative senses of words.
His ability to trace analogies often leads him to a truer word than
more remarkable writers have found; as when, in his chapter on the
human skin, he describes the papillary cutis as “an encampment of
small conical tents coextensive with the surface of the body.” The
faith he puts in old and current expressions as having sprung from an
instinct wiser than science, and safely to be trusted if they can be
interpreted. The man of science discovers no world for the mind of man
with all its faculties to inhabit. Wilkinson finds a _home_ for the
imagination, and it is no longer outcast and homeless. All perception
of truth is the detection of an analogy; we reason from our hands to
our head.

It is remarkable that Kalm says in 1748 (being in Philadelphia): “Coals
have not yet been found in Pennsylvania; but people pretend to have
seen them higher up in the country among the natives. Many people
however agree that they are met with in great quantity more to the
north, near Cape Breton.”

       *       *       *       *       *

As we grow old we live more coarsely, we relax a little in our
disciplines, and, to some extent, cease to obey our finest instincts.
We are more careless about our diet and our chastity. But we should be
fastidious to the extreme of sanity.[349] All wisdom is the reward of
a discipline, conscious or unconscious.

By moonlight at Potter’s Field toward Bear Garden Hill, 8 P. M. The
whip-poor-wills sing.

Cultivate reverence. It is as if you were so much more respectable
yourself. By the quality of a man’s writing, by the elevation of its
tone, you may measure his self-respect. How shall a man continue his
culture after manhood?

Moonlight on Fair Haven Pond seen from the Cliffs. A sheeny lake in
the midst of a boundless forest, the windy surf sounding freshly and
wildly in the single pine behind you; the silence of hushed wolves in
the wilderness, and, as you fancy, moose looking off from the shore
of the lake. The stars of poetry and history and unexplored nature
looking down on the scene. This is my world now, with a dull whitish
mark curving northward through the forest marking the outlet to the
lake. Fair Haven by moonlight lies there like a lake in the Maine
wilderness in the midst of a primitive forest untrodden by man. This
light and this hour take the civilization all out of the landscape.
Even in villages dogs bay the moon; in forests like this we listen to
hear wolves howl to Cynthia.

Even at this hour in the evening the crickets chirp, the small birds
peep, the wind roars in the wood, as if it were just before dawn. The
moonlight seems to linger as if it were giving way to the light of
coming day.

The landscape seen from the slightest elevation by moonlight is seen
remotely, and flattened, as it were, into mere light and shade, open
field and forest, like the surface of the earth seen from the top of a
mountain.

How much excited we are, how much recruited, by a great many particular
fragrances! A field of ripening corn, now at night, that has been
topped, with the stalks stacked up to dry,—an inexpressibly dry,
rich, sweet, ripening scent.[350] I feel as if I were an ear of
ripening corn myself. Is not the whole air then a compound of such
odors undistinguishable? Drying corn-stalks in a field; what an
herb-garden![351]


_Sept. 6._ The other afternoon I met Sam H—— walking on the railroad
between the depot and the back road. It was something quite novel to
see him there, though the railroad there is only a short thoroughfare
to the public road. It then occurred to me that I had never met Mr.
H. on the railroad, though he walks every day, and moreover that it
would be quite impossible for him to walk on the railroad, such a
formalist as he is, such strait-jackets we weave for ourselves. He
could do nothing that was not sanctioned by the longest use of men,
and as men had voted in all their assemblies from the first to travel
on the public way, he would confine himself to that. It would no doubt
seem to him very improper, not to say undignified, to walk on the
railroad; and then, is it not forbidden by the railroad corporations?
I was sure he could not keep the railroad, but was merely using the
thoroughfare here which a thousand pioneers had prepared for him. I
stood to see what he would do. He turned off the rails directly on to
the back road and pursued his walk. A passing train will never meet him
on the railroad causeway. How much of the life of certain men _goes_ to
sustain, to make respected, the institutions of society. They are the
ones who pay the heaviest tax. Here are certain valuable institutions
which can only be sustained by a wonderful strain which appears all to
come upon certain Spartans who volunteer. Certain men are always to be
found—especially the children of our present institutions—who are born
with an instinct to perceive them. They are, in effect, supported by
a fund which society possesses for that end, or they receive a pension
and their life _seems_ to be a sinecure,—but it is not. The unwritten
laws are the most stringent. They are required to wear a certain
dress. What an array of gentlemen whose sole employment—and it is no
sinecure—is to support their dignity, and with it the dignity of so
many indispensable institutions!

The use of many vegetables—wild plants—for food, which botanists
relate, such as Kalm at Cap aux Oyes on the St. Lawrence, _viz._ the
sea plantain, sea-rocket, sweet-gale, etc., etc., making us feel the
poorer at first because we never use them, really advertises us of our
superior riches, and shows to what extremities men have been driven in
times of scarcity. No people that fare as well as we will grub these
weeds out of the seashore.

       *       *       *       *       *

2 P. M.—To Hapgood’s in Acton direct, returning _via_ Strawberry Hill
and Smith’s Road.

The ripening grapes begin to fill the air with their fragrance. The
vervain will hardly do for a clock, for I perceive that some later
and smaller specimens have not much more than begun to blossom, while
most have done. Saw a tall pear tree by the roadside beyond Harris’s
in front of Hapgood’s. Saw the lambkill (_Kalmia angustifolia_) in
blossom—a few fresh blossoms at _the ends_ of the fresh twigs—on
Strawberry Hill, beautiful bright flowers. Apparently a new spring with
it, while seed vessels, apparently of this year, hung dry below.

From Strawberry Hill the first, but a very slight, glimpse of Nagog
Pond by standing up on the wall. That is enough to relate of a hill,
methinks, that its elevation gives you the first sight of some distant
lake. The horizon is remarkably blue with mist this afternoon. Looking
from this hill over Acton, successive valleys filled with blue mist
appear, and divided by darker lines of wooded hills. The shadows of the
elms are deepened, as if the whole atmosphere were permeated by floods
of ether. Annursnack never looked so well as now seen from this hill.
The ether gives a velvet softness to the whole landscape. The hills
float in it. A blue veil is drawn over the earth.

The elecampane (_Inula Helenium_), with its broad leaves wrinkled
underneath and the remains of sunflower-like blossoms, in front of
Nathan Brooks’s, Acton, and near J. H. Wheeler’s. _Prenanthes alba_;
this Gray calls _Nabalus albus_, white lettuce or rattlesnake-root.
Also I _seem_ (?) to have found _Nabalus Fraseri_, or lion’s-foot.

Every morning for a week there has been a fog which all disappeared by
seven or eight o’clock.

A large field of sunflowers for hens now in full bloom at Temple’s,
surrounding the house, and now, at 6 o’clock P. M., facing the east.

The larches in the front yards, both Scotch and American, have turned
red. Their fall has come.


_Sept. 7._ We sometimes experience a mere fullness of life, which
does not find any channels to flow into. We are stimulated, but to
no obvious purpose. I feel myself uncommonly prepared for _some_
literary work, but I can select no work. I am prepared not so much for
contemplation, as for forceful expression. I am braced both physically
and intellectually. It is not so much the music as the marching to
the music that I feel. I feel that the juices of the fruits which I
have eaten, the melons and apples, have ascended to my brain and are
stimulating it. They give me a heady force. Now I can write nervously.
Carlyle’s writing is for the most part of this character.

Miss Martineau’s last book is not so bad as the timidity which fears
its influence. As if the popularity of this or that book would be so
fatal, and man would not still be man in the world. Nothing is so much
to be feared as fear. Atheism may comparatively be popular with God
himself.[352]

What shall we say of these timid folk who carry the principle of
thinking nothing and doing nothing and being nothing to such an
extreme? As if, in the absence of thought, that vast yearning of their
natures for something to fill the vacuum made the least traditionary
expression and shadow of a thought to be clung to with instinctive
tenacity. They atone for their producing nothing by a brutish respect
for something. They are as simple as oxen, and as guiltless of thought
and reflection. Their reflections are reflected from other minds. The
creature of institutions, bigoted and a conservatist, can say nothing
hearty. He cannot meet life with life, but only with words. He rebuts
you by avoiding you. He is shocked like a woman.

Our ecstatic states, which appear to yield so little fruit, have this
value at least: though in the seasons when our genius reigns we may be
powerless for expression, yet, in calmer seasons, when our talent is
active, the memory of those rarer moods comes to color our picture and
is the permanent paint-pot, as it were, into which we dip our brush.
Thus no life or experience goes unreported at last; but if it be not
solid gold it is gold-leaf, which gilds the furniture of the mind.
It is an experience of infinite beauty on which we unfailingly draw,
which enables us to exaggerate ever truly. Our moments of inspiration
are not lost though we have no particular poem to show for them; for
those experiences have left an indelible impression, and we are ever
and anon reminded of them. Their truth subsides, and in cooler moments
we can use them as paint to gild and adorn our prose. When I despair
to sing them, I will remember that they will furnish me with paint
with which to adorn and preserve the works of talent one day. They are
like a pot of pure ether. They lend the writer when the moment comes
a certain superfluity of wealth, making his expression to overrun and
float itself. It is the difference between our river, now parched and
dried up, exposing its unsightly and weedy bottom, and the same when,
in the spring, it covers all the meads with a chain of placid lakes,
reflecting the forests and the skies.

We are receiving our portion of the infinite. The art of life! Was
there ever anything memorable written upon it? By what disciplines
to secure the most life, with what care to watch our thoughts. To
observe what transpires, not in the street, but in the mind and heart
of me! I do not remember any page which will tell me how to spend this
afternoon. I do not so much wish to know how to economize time as how
to spend it, by what means to grow rich, that the day may not have been
in vain.

What if one moon has come and gone with its world of poetry, its weird
teachings, its oracular suggestions? So divine a creature, freighted
with hints for me, and I not use her! One moon gone by unnoticed!!
Suppose you attend to the hints, to the suggestions, which the moon
makes for one month,—commonly in vain,—will they not be very different
from anything in literature or religion or philosophy?[353]

The scenery, when it is truly seen, reacts on the life of the seer.
How to live. How to get the most life. As if you were to teach the
young hunter how to entrap his game. How to extract its honey from the
flower of the world. That is my every-day business. I am as busy as a
bee about it. I ramble over all fields on that errand, and am never
so happy as when I feel myself heavy with honey and wax. I am like
a bee searching the livelong day for the sweets of nature. Do I not
impregnate and intermix the flowers, produce rare and finer varieties
by transferring my eyes from one to another? I do as naturally and as
joyfully, with my own humming music, seek honey all the day. With what
honeyed thought any experience yields me I take a bee line to my cell.
It is with flowers I would deal. Where is the flower, there is the
honey,—which is perchance the nectareous portion of the fruit,—there
is to be the fruit, and no doubt flowers are thus colored and painted
to attract and guide the bee. So by the dawning or radiance of beauty
are we advertised where is the honey and the fruit of thought, of
discourse, and of action. We are first attracted by the beauty of the
flower, before we discover the honey which is a foretaste of the future
fruit. Did not the young Achilles (?) spend his youth learning how
to hunt? The art of spending a day. If it is possible that we may be
addressed, it behooves us to be attentive. If by watching all day and
all night I may detect some trace of the Ineffable, then will it not
be worth the while to watch? Watch and pray without ceasing, but not
necessarily in sadness. Be of good cheer. Those Jews were too sad: to
another people a still deeper revelation may suggest only joy. Don’t I
know what gladness is? Is it but the reflex of sadness, its back side?
In the Hebrew gladness, I hear but too distinctly still the sound of
sadness retreating. Give me a gladness which has never given place to
sadness.

I am convinced that men are not well employed, that this is not the
way to spend a day. If by patience, if by watching, I can secure one
new ray of light, can feel myself elevated for an instant upon Pisgah,
the world which was dead prose to me become living and divine, shall I
not watch ever? shall I not be a watchman henceforth? If by watching
a whole year on the city’s walls I may obtain a communication from
heaven, shall I not do well to shut up my shop and turn a watchman?
Can a youth, a man, do more wisely than to go where his life is to [be]
found? As if I had suffered that to be rumor which may be verified. We
are surrounded by a rich and fertile mystery. May we not probe it, pry
into it, employ ourselves about it, a little? To devote your life to
the discovery of the divinity in nature or to the eating of oysters,
would they not be attended with very different results?

I cannot _easily_ buy a blank-book to write thoughts in; they are all
ruled for dollars and cents.[354]

If the wine, the water, which will nourish me grows on the surface of
the moon, I will do the best I can to go to the moon for it.

The discoveries which we make abroad are special and particular; those
which we make at home are general and significant. The further off, the
nearer the surface. The nearer home, the deeper. Go in search of the
springs of life, and you will get exercise enough. Think of a man’s
swinging dumb-bells for his health, when those springs are bubbling
in far-off pastures unsought by him! The seeming necessity of swinging
dumb-bells proves that he has lost his way.[355]

To watch for, describe, all the divine features which I detect in
Nature.

My profession is to be always on the alert to find God in nature, to
know his lurking-places, to attend all the oratorios, the operas, in
nature.

The mind may perchance be persuaded to act, to energize, by the action
and energy of the body. Any kind of liquid will fetch the pump.

We all have our states of fullness and of emptiness, but we overflow
at different points. One overflows through the sensual outlets, another
through his heart, another through his head, and another perchance only
through the higher part of his head, or his poetic faculty. It depends
on where each is tight and open. We can, perchance, then direct our
nutriment to those organs we specially use.

How happens it that there are few men so well employed,—so much to
their mind,—but that a little money or fame would buy them off from
their present pursuits?

To Conantum _via_ fields, Hubbard’s Grove, and grain-field, to Tupelo
Cliff and Conantum and returning over peak same way. 6 P. M.

I hear no larks sing at evening as in the spring, nor robins; only a
few distressed notes from the robin. In Hubbard’s grain-field beyond
the brook, now the sun is down. The air is very still. There is a fine
sound of crickets, not loud. The woods and single trees are heavier
masses in the landscape than in the spring. Night has more allies.
The heavy shadows of woods and trees are remarkable now. The meadows
are green with their second crop. I hear only a tree-toad or song
sparrow singing as in spring, at long intervals. The Roman wormwood is
beginning to yellow-green my shoes,—intermingled with the blue-curls
over the sand in this grain-field. Perchance some poet likened this
yellow dust to the ambrosia of the gods. The birds are remarkably
silent. At the bridge perceive the bats are out. And the yet silvery
moon, not quite full, is reflected in the water. The water is perfectly
still, and there is a red tinge from the evening sky in it.

The sky is singularly marked this evening. There are bars or rays of
nebulous light springing from the western horizon where the sun has
disappeared, and alternating with beautiful blue rays, more blue by
far than any other portion of the sky. These continue to diverge till
they have reached the middle, and then converge to the eastern horizon,
making a symmetrical figure like the divisions of a muskmelon, not very
bright, yet distinct, though growing less and less bright toward the
east. It was a quite remarkable phenomenon encompassing the heavens,
as if you were to behold the divisions of a muskmelon thus alternately
colored from within it. A proper vision, a colored mist. The most
beautiful thing in nature is the sun reflected from a tearful cloud.
These white and blue ribs embraced the earth. The two outer blues much
the brightest and matching one another.

You hear the hum of mosquitoes.

Going up the road. The sound of the crickets is now much more universal
and loud. Now in the fields I see the white streak of the neottia in
the twilight. The whip-poor-wills sing far off. I smell burnt land
somewhere. At Tupelo Cliff I hear the sound of singers on the river,
young men and women,—which is unusual here,—returning from their row.
Man’s voice, thus uttered, fits well the spaces. It fills nature. And,
after all, the singing of men is something far grander than any natural
sound. It is wonderful that men do not oftener sing in the fields,
by day and night. I bathe at the north side the Cliff, while the moon
shines round the end of the rock. The opposite Cliff is reflected in
the water. Then sit on the south side of the Cliff in the woods. One
or two fireflies. Could it be a glow-worm? I thought I saw one or two
in the air. That is all in this walk. I hear a whip-poor-will uttering
a cluck of suspicion in my rear. He is suspicious and inquisitive.
The river stretches off southward from me. I see the sheeny portions
of its western shore interruptedly for a quarter of a mile, where
the moonlight is reflected from the pads, a strong, gleaming light
while the water is lost in the obscurity. I hear the sound from time
to time of a leaping fish, or a frog, or a muskrat, or turtle. It is
even warmer, _methinks_, than it was in August, and it is perfectly
clear,—the air. I know not how it is that this universal crickets’
creak should sound thus regularly intermittent, as if for the most part
they fell in with one another and creaked in time, making a certain
pulsing sound, a sort of breathing or panting of all nature. You sit
twenty feet above the still river; see the sheeny pads, and the moon,
and some bare tree-tops in the distant horizon. Those bare tree-tops
add greatly to the wildness.

Lower down I see the moon in the water as bright as in the heavens;
only the water-bugs disturb its disk; and now I catch a faint glassy
glare from the whole river surface, which before was simply dark. This
is set in a frame of double darkness on the east, _i. e._ the reflected
shore of woods and hills and the reality, the shadow and the substance,
bipartite, answering to each.

I see the northern lights over my shoulder, to remind me of the
Esquimaux and that they are still my contemporaries on this globe,
that they too are taking their walks on another part of the planet,
in pursuit of seals, perchance.[356] The stars are dimly reflected in
the water. The path of water-bugs in the moon’s rays is like ripples
of light. It is only when you stand fronting the sun or moon that
you see their light reflected in the water. I hear no frogs these
nights,—bullfrogs or others,—as in the spring. It is not the season of
sound.

At Conantum end, just under the wall. From this point and at this
height I do not perceive any bright or yellowish light on Fair Haven,
but an oily and glass-like smoothness on its southwestern bay, through
a very slight mistiness. Two or three pines appear to stand in the
moonlit air on this side of the pond, while the enlightened portion of
the water is bounded by the heavy reflection of the wood on the east.
It was so soft and velvety a light as contained a thousand placid days
sweetly put to rest in the bosom of the water. So looked the North Twin
Lake in the Maine woods. It reminds me of placid lakes in the mid-noon
of Indian summer days, but yet more placid and civilized, suggesting
a higher cultivation, as the wild ever does, which æons of summer days
have gone to make. Like a summer day seen far away. All the effects of
sunlight, with a softer tone; and all this stillness of the water and
the air superadded, and the witchery of the hour. What gods are they
that require so fair a vase of gleaming water to their prospect in
the midst of the wild woods by night? Else why this beauty allotted to
night, a gem to sparkle in the zone of night? They are strange gods now
out; methinks their names are not in any mythology.[357] I can faintly
trace its zigzag border of sheeny pads even here. If such is then to
be seen in remotest wildernesses, does it not suggest its own nymphs
and wood gods to enjoy it? As when, at middle of the placid noon in
Indian-summer days, all the surface of a lake is as one cobweb gleaming
in the sun, which heaves gently to the passing zephyr. There was the
lake, its glassy surface just distinguishable, its sheeny shore of
pads, with a few pines bathed in light on its hither shore, just as in
the middle of a November day, except that this was the chaster light
of the moon, the cooler temperature of the night, and there were the
deep shades of night that fenced it round and imbosomed. It tells of a
far-away, long-passed civilization, of an antiquity superior to time,
unappreciable by time.

Is there such virtue in raking cranberries that those men’s industry
whom I now see on the meadow shall reprove my idleness? Can I not
go over those same meadows after them, and rake still more valuable
fruits? Can I not rake with my mind? Can I not rake a thought,
perchance, which shall be worth a bushel of cranberries?

A certain refinement and civilization in nature which increases with
the wildness. The civilization that consists with wildness, the light
that is in night. A smile as in a dream on the face of the sleeping
lake. There is light enough to show what we see, what _night_ has to
exhibit. Any more would obscure these objects. I am not advertised
of any deficiency of light.[358] The actual is fair as a vision
or a dream. If ever we have attained to any nobleness, even in our
imagination and intentions, that will surely ennoble the features of
nature for us, that will clothe them with beauty. Of course no jeweller
ever dealt with a gem so fair and suggestive as this actual lake, the
scene, it may be, of so much noble and poetic life, and not merely [to]
adorn some monarch’s crown.

It is remarkably still at this hour and season. No sound of bird or
beast for the most part. This has none of the reputed noxious qualities
of night.

On the peak. The faint sounds of birds, dreaming aloud in the night,
the fresh, cool air, and sound of the wind rushing over the rocks
remind me of the tops of mountains. That is, all the earth is but
the outside of the planet bordering on the hard-eyed sky. Equally
withdrawn and near to heaven is this pasture as the summit of the White
Mountains. All the earth’s surface like a mountain-top, for I see its
relation to heaven as simply, and am not imposed upon by a difference
of a few feet in elevation. In this faint, hoary light, all fields
are like a mossy rock and remote from the cultivated plains of day.
All is equally savage, equally solitary and cool-aired, and the slight
difference in elevation is felt to be unimportant. It is all one with
Caucasus, the slightest hill pasture.

The basswood had a singularly solid look and sharply defined, as by a
web or film, as if its leaves covered it like scales.

Scared up a whip-poor-will on the ground on the hill. Will not my
townsmen consider me a benefactor if I conquer some realms from the
night, if I can show them that there is some beauty awake while they
are asleep, if I add to the domains of poetry,[359] if I report to the
gazettes anything transpiring in our midst worthy of man’s attention?
I will say nothing now to the disparagement of Day, for he is not here
to defend himself.

The northern lights now, as I descend from the Conantum house, have
become a crescent of light crowned with short, shooting flames,—or the
shadows of flames, for sometimes they are dark as well as white. There
is scarcely any dew even in the low lands.

Now the fire in the north increases wonderfully, not shooting up so
much as creeping along, like a fire on the mountains of the north
seen afar in the night. The Hyperborean gods are burning brush, and
it spread, and all the hoes in heaven couldn’t stop it. It spread
from west to east over the crescent hill. Like a vast fiery worm it
lay across the northern sky, broken into many pieces; and each piece,
with rainbow colors skirting it, strove to advance itself toward the
east, worm-like, on its own annular muscles. It has spread into their
choicest wood-lots. Now it shoots up like a single solitary watch-fire
or burning bush, or where it ran up a pine tree like powder, and
still it continues to gleam here and there like a fat stump in the
burning, and is reflected in the water. And now I see the gods by great
exertions have got it under, and the stars have come out without fear,
in peace.

Though no birds sing, the crickets vibrate their shrill and stridulous
cymbals, especially on the alders of the causeway, those minstrels
especially engaged for Night’s quire.[360]

It takes some time to wear off the trivial impression which the day has
made, and thus the first hours of night are sometimes lost.

There were two hen-hawks soared and circled for our entertainment, when
we were in the woods on that Boon Plain the other day, crossing each
other’s orbits from time to time, alternating like the squirrels of the
morning, till, alarmed by our imitation of a hawk’s shrill cry, they
gradually inflated themselves, made themselves more aerial, and rose
higher and higher into the heavens, and were at length lost to sight;
yet all the while earnestly looking, scanning the surface of the earth
for a stray mouse or rabbit.[361]


_Sept. 8._ No fog this morning. Shall I not have words as fresh as
my thoughts? Shall I use any other man’s word? A genuine thought
or feeling can find expression for itself, if it have to invent
hieroglyphics. It has the universe for type-metal. It is for want of
original thought that one man’s style is like another’s.

       *       *       *       *       *

Certainly the voice of no bird or beast can be compared with that of
man for true melody. All other sounds seem to be hushed, as if their
possessors were attending, when the voice of man is heard in melody.
The air gladly bears the burden. It is infinitely significant. Man only
sings in concert. The bird’s song is a mere interjectional shout of
joy; man’s a glorious expression of the foundations of his joy.

Do not the song of birds and the fireflies go with the grass? While
the grass is fresh, the earth is in its vigor. The greenness of the
grass is the best symptom or evidence of the earth’s youth or health.
Perhaps it will be found that when the grass ceases to be fresh and
green, or after June, the birds have ceased to sing, and that the
fireflies, too, no longer in _myriads_ sparkle in the meadows. Perhaps
a history of the year would be a history of the grass, or of a leaf,
regarding the grass-blades as leaves, for it is equally true that the
leaves soon lose their freshness and soundness, and become the prey
of insects and of drought. Plants commonly soon cease to grow for the
year, unless they may have a fall growth, which is a kind of second
spring. In the feelings of the man, too, the year is already past, and
he looks forward to the coming winter. His occasional rejuvenescence
and faith in the current time is like the aftermath, a scanty crop.
The enterprise which he has not already undertaken cannot be undertaken
this year. The period of youth is past. The year may be in its summer,
in its manhood, but it is no longer in the flower of its age. It is a
season of withering, of dust and heat, a season of small fruits and
trivial experiences. Summer thus answers to manhood. But there is
an aftermath in early autumn, and some spring flowers bloom again,
followed by an Indian summer of finer atmosphere and of a pensive
beauty. May my life be not destitute of its Indian summer, a season of
fine and clear, mild weather in which I may prolong my hunting before
the winter comes, when I may once more lie on the ground with faith, as
in spring, and even with more serene confidence. And then I will [wrap
the] drapery of summer about me and lie down to pleasant dreams. As one
year passes into another through the medium of winter, so does this our
life pass into another through the medium of death.

De Quincey and Dickens have not moderation enough. They never stutter;
they flow too readily.

The tree-primrose and the dwarf ditto and epilobium still. Locust is
heard. _Aster amplexicaulis_, beautiful blue, purplish blue (?), about
twenty-four rayed. _Utricularia vulgaris_, bladderwort. Dandelion and
houstonia.


_Sept. 9._ 2 A. M.—The moon not quite full. To Conantum _via_ road.

There is a low vapor in the meadows beyond the depot, dense and
white, though scarcely higher than a man’s head, concealing the stems
of the trees. I see that the oaks, which are so dark and distinctly
outlined, are illumined by the moon on the opposite side. This as
I go up the back road. A few thin, ineffectual clouds in the sky. I
come out thus into the moonlit night, where men are not, as if into a
scenery anciently deserted by men. The life of men is like a dream.
It is three thousand years since night has had possession. Go forth
and hear the crickets chirp at midnight. Hear if their dynasty is not
an ancient one and well founded. I feel the antiquity of the night.
She surely repossesses herself of her realms, as if her dynasty were
uninterrupted, or she had underlain the day. No sounds but the steady
creaking of crickets and the occasional crowing of cocks.

I go by the farmer’s houses and barns, standing there in the dim light
under the trees, as if they lay at an immense distance or under a veil.
The farmer and his oxen now all asleep. Not even a watch-dog awake. The
human slumbers. There is less of man in the world.

The fog in the lowlands on the Corner road is never still. It now
advances and envelops me as I stand to write these words, then clears
away, with ever noiseless step. It covers the meadows like a web. I
hear the clock strike three.

Now at the clayey bank. The light of Orion’s belt seems to show traces
of the blue day through which it came to us. The sky at least is
lighter on that side than in the west, even about the moon. Even by
night the sky is blue and not black, for we see through the veil of
night into the distant atmosphere of day. I see to the plains of the
sun, where the sunbeams are revelling. The cricket’s (?) song, on the
alders of the causeway, not quite so loud at this hour as at evening.
The moon is getting low. I hear a wagon cross one of the bridges
leading into the town. I see the moonlight at this hour on a different
side of objects. I smell the ripe apples many rods off beyond the
bridge. A sultry night; a thin coat is enough.

On the first top of Conantum. I hear the farmer harnessing his horse
and starting for the distant market, but no man harnesses himself, and
starts for worthier enterprises. One cock-crow tells the whole story of
the farmer’s life. The moon is now sinking into clouds in the horizon.
I see the glow-worms deep in the grass by the little brookside in midst
of Conantum. The moon shines dun and red. A solitary whip-poor-will
sings.

The clock strikes four. A few dogs bark. A few more wagons start for
market, their faint rattling heard in the distance. I hear my owl
without a name; the murmur of the slow-approaching freight-train, as
far off, perchance, as Waltham; and one early bird.

The round, red moon disappearing in the west. I detect a whiteness in
the east. Some dark, massive clouds have come over from the west within
the hour, as if attracted by the approaching sun, and have arranged
themselves raywise about the eastern portal, as if to bar his coming.
They have moved suddenly and almost unobservedly quite across the sky
(which before was clear) from west to east. No trumpet was heard which
marshalled and advanced these dark masses of the west’s forces thus
rapidly against the coming day. Column after column the mighty west
sent forth across the sky while men slept, but all in vain.

The eastern horizon is now grown dun-colored, showing where the
advanced guard of the night are already skirmishing with the vanguard
of the sun, a lurid light tingeing the atmosphere there, while a
dark-columned cloud hangs imminent over the broad portal, untouched by
the glare. Some bird flies over, making a noise like the barking of a
puppy.[362] It is yet so dark that I have dropped my pencil and cannot
find it.

The sound of the cars is like that of a rushing wind. They come
on slowly. I thought at first a morning wind was rising. And now
(perchance at half-past four) I hear the sound of some far-off
factory-bell arousing the operatives to their early labors. It sounds
very sweet here. It is very likely some factory which I have never
seen, in some valley which I have never visited; yet now I hear this,
which is its only matin bell, sweet and inspiring as if it summoned
holy men and maids to worship and not factory girls and men to resume
their trivial toil, as if it were the summons of some religious or even
poetic community. My first impression is that it is the matin bell of
some holy community who in a distant valley dwell, a band of spiritual
knights,—thus sounding far and wide, sweet and sonorous, in harmony
with their own morning thoughts. What else could I suppose fitting this
earth and hour? Some man of high resolve, devoted soul, has touched the
rope; and by its peals how many men and maids are waked from peaceful
slumbers to fragrant morning thoughts! Why should I fear to tell that
it is Knight’s factory-bell at Assabet? A few melodious peals and all
is still again.

The whip-poor-wills now begin to sing in earnest about half an hour
before sunrise, as if making haste to improve the short time that is
left them. As far as my observation goes, they sing for several hours
in the early part of the night, are silent commonly at midnight,—though
you may meet [them] then sitting on a rock or flitting silently
about,—then sing again just before sunrise. It grows more and more red
in the east—a fine-grained red under the overhanging cloud—and lighter
too, and the threatening clouds are falling off to southward of the
sun’s passage, shrunken and defeated, leaving his path comparatively
clear. The increased light shows more distinctly the river and the fog.

5 o’clock.—The light now reveals a thin film of vapor like a gossamer
veil cast over the lower hills beneath the Cliffs and stretching to the
river, thicker in the ravines, thinnest on the even slopes. The distant
meadows towards the north beyond Conant’s Grove, full of fog, appear
like a vast lake out of which rise Annursnack and Ponkawtasset like
rounded islands. Nawshawtuct is a low and wooded isle, scarcely seen
above the waves. The heavens are now clear again. The vapor, which was
confined to the river and meadows, now rises and creeps up the sides
of the hills. I see it in transparent columns advancing down the valley
of the river, ghost-like, from Fair Haven, and investing some wooded or
rocky promontory, before free. So ghosts are said to advance.

Annursnack is exactly like some round, steep, distant hill on the
opposite shore of a large lake (and Tabor on the other side), with here
and there some low Brush Island in middle of the waves (the tops of
some oaks or elms). Oh, what a sail I could take, if I had the right
kind of bark, over to Annursnack! for there she lies four miles from
land as sailors say. And all the farms and houses of Concord are at
bottom of that sea. So I forget them, and my thought sails triumphantly
over them. As I looked down where the village of Concord lay buried in
fog, I thought of nothing but the surface of a lake, a summer sea over
which to sail; no more than a voyager on the Dead Sea who had not read
the Testament would think of Sodom and Gomorrah, once cities of the
plain. I only wished to get off to one of the low isles I saw in midst
of the [sea] (it may have been the top of Holbrook’s elm), and spend
the whole summer day there.

Meanwhile the redness in the east had diminished and was less deep.
(The fog over some meadows looked green.) I went down to Tupelo Cliff
to bathe. A great bittern, which I had scared, flew heavily across
the stream. The redness had risen at length above the dark cloud, the
sun approaching. And next the redness became a sort of yellowish or
fawn-colored light, and the sun now set fire to the edges of the broken
cloud which had hung over the horizon, and they glowed like burning
turf.


_Sept. 10._ As I watch the groves on the meadow opposite our house, I
see how differently they look at different hours of the day, _i. e._
in different lights, when the sun shines on them variously. In the
morning, perchance, they seem one blended mass of light green. In the
afternoon, distinct trees appear, separated by heavy shadows, and in
some places I can see quite through the grove.

3 P. M.—To the Cliffs and the Grape Cliff beyond.

Hardhack and meadow-sweet are now all dry. I see the smoke of burning
brush in the west horizon this dry and sultry afternoon, and wish to
look off from some hill. It is a kind of work the farmer cannot do
without discovery. Sometimes I smell these smokes several miles off,
and by the odor know it is not a burning building, but withered leaves
and the rubbish of the woods and swamp. As I go through the woods, I
see that the ferns have turned brown and give the woods an autumnal
look. The boiling spring is almost completely dry. Nothing flows (I
mean without the shed), but there are many hornets and yellow wasps
apparently buzzing and circling about in jealousy of one another,
either drinking the stagnant water, which is the most accessible this
dry parching day, or it may be collecting something from the slime,—I
think the former.

As I go up Fair Haven Hill, I see some signs of the approaching fall
of the white pine. On some trees the old leaves are already somewhat
reddish, though not enough to give the trees a parti-colored look, and
they come off easily on being touched,—the old leaves on the lower part
of the twigs.

Some farmers are sowing their winter rye? I see the fields smoothly
rolled. (I hear the locust still.) I see others plowing steep rocky
and bushy fields, apparently for the same purpose. How beautiful
the sprout-land (burnt plain) seen from the Cliff! No more cheering
and inspiring sight than a young wood springing up thus over a large
tract, when you look down on it, the light green of the maples shaded
off into the darker oaks; and here and there a maple blushes quite
red, enlivening the scene yet more. Surely this earth is fit to be
inhabited, and many enterprises may be undertaken with hope where so
many young plants are pushing up. In the spring I burned over a hundred
acres till the earth was sere and black, and by midsummer this space
was clad in a fresher and more luxuriant green than the surrounding
even. Shall man then despair? Is he not a sprout-land too, after
never so many searings and witherings?[363] If you witness growth and
luxuriance, it is all the same as if you grew luxuriantly.

I see three smokes in Stow. One sends up dark volumes of wreathed
smoke, as if from the mouth of Erebus. It is remarkable what
effects so thin and subtile a substance as smoke produces, even at a
distance,—dark and heavy and powerful as rocks at a distance.

The woodbine is red on the rocks.

The poke is a very rich and striking plant. Some which stand under the
Cliffs quite dazzled me with their now purple stems gracefully drooping
each way, their rich, somewhat yellowish, purple-veined leaves, their
bright purple racemes,—peduncles, and pedicels, and calyx-like petals
from which the birds have picked the berries (these racemes, with their
petals now turned to purple, are more brilliant than anything of the
kind),—flower-buds, flowers, ripe berries and dark purple ones, and
calyx-like petals which have lost their fruit, all on the same plant. I
love to see any redness in the vegetation of the temperate zone. It is
the richest color. I love to press these berries between my fingers and
see their rich purple wine staining my hand. It asks a bright sun on it
to make it show to best advantage, and it must be seen at this season
of the year. It speaks to my blood. Every part of it is flower, such is
its superfluity of color,—a feast of color. That is the richest flower
which most abounds in color. What need to taste the fruit, to drink the
wine, to him who can thus taste and drink with his eyes? Its boughs,
gracefully drooping, offering repasts to the birds. It is cardinal in
its rank, as in its color. Nature here is full of blood and heat and
luxuriance. What a triumph it appears in Nature to have produced and
perfected such a plant,—as if this were enough for a summer.[364]

The downy seeds of the groundsel are taking their flight here. The
calyx has dismissed them and quite curled back, having done its part.
_Lespedeza sessiliflora_, or reticulated lespedeza on the Cliffs now
out of bloom. At the Grape Cliff, the few bright-red leaves of the
tupelo contrast with the polished green ones. The tupelos with drooping
branches.

The grape-vines overrunning and bending down the maples form little
arching bowers over the meadow, five or six feet in diameter, like
parasols held over the ladies of the harem, in the East. _Cuscuta
Americana_, or dodder, in blossom still. The _Desmodium paniculatum_ of
De Candolle and Gray (_Hedysarum paniculatum_ of Linnæus and Bigelow),
tick-trefoil, with still one blossom, by the path-side up from the
meadow. The rhomboidal joints of its loments adhere to my clothes. One
of an interesting family that thus disperse themselves. The oak-ball of
dirty drab now.[365]


_Sept. 11._ Every artisan learns positively something by his trade.
Each craft is familiar with a few simple, well-known, well-established
facts, not requiring any genius to discover, but mere use and
familiarity. You may go by the man at his work in the street every
day of your life, and though he is there before you, carrying into
practice certain essential information, you shall never be the wiser.
Each trade is in fact a craft, a cunning, a covering an ability;
and its methods are the result of a long experience. There sits a
stone-mason, splitting Westford granite for fence-posts. Egypt has
perchance taught New England something in this matter. His hammer,
his chisels, his wedges, his shims or half-rounds, his iron spoon,—I
suspect that these tools are hoary with age as with granite dust. He
learns as easily where the best granite comes from as he learns how
to erect that screen to keep off the sun. He knows that he can drill
faster into a large stone than a small one, because there is less jar
and yielding. He deals in stone as the carpenter in lumber. In many of
his operations only the materials are different. His work is slow and
expensive. Nature is here hard to be overcome. He wears up one or two
drills in splitting a single stone. He must sharpen his tools oftener
than the carpenter. He fights with granite. He knows the temper of
the rocks. He grows stony himself. His tread is ponderous and steady
like the fall of a rock. And yet by patience and art he splits a
stone as surely as the carpenter or woodcutter a log. So much time and
perseverance will accomplish. One would say that mankind had much less
moral than physical energy, that any day you see men following the
trade of splitting rocks, who yet shrink from undertaking apparently
less arduous moral labors, the solving of moral problems. See how
surely he proceeds. He does not hesitate to drill a dozen holes, each
one the labor of a day or two for a savage; he carefully takes out the
dust with his iron spoon; he inserts his wedges, one in each hole, and
protects the sides of the holes and gives resistance to his wedges
by thin pieces of half-round iron (or shims); he marks the red line
which he has drawn, with his chisel, carefully cutting it straight; and
then how carefully he drives each wedge in succession, fearful lest he
should not have a good split!

The habit of looking at men in the gross makes their lives have less
of human interest for us. But though there are crowds of laborers
before us, yet each one leads his little epic life each day. There is
the stone-mason, who, methought, was simply a stony man that hammered
stone from breakfast to dinner, and dinner to supper, and then went to
his slumbers. But he, I find, is even a man like myself, for he feels
the heat of the sun and has raised some boards on a frame to protect
him. And now, at mid-forenoon, I see his wife and child have come and
brought him drink and meat for his lunch and to assuage the stoniness
of his labor, and sit to chat with him.

There are many rocks lying there for him to split from end to end,
and he will surely do it. This only at the command of luxury, since
stone posts are preferred to wood. But how many moral blocks are lying
there in every man’s yard, which he surely will not split nor earnestly
endeavor to split. There lie the blocks which will surely get split,
but here lie the blocks which will surely not get split. Do we say
it is too hard for human faculties? But does not the mason dull a
basketful of steel chisels in a day, and yet, by sharpening them again
and tempering them aright, succeed? Moral effort! Difficulty to be
overcome!!! Why, men work in stone, and sharpen their drills when they
go home to dinner!

Why should Canada, wild and unsettled as it is, impress one as an
older country than the States, except that her institutions are old.
All things seem to contend there with a certain rust of antiquity,
such as forms on old armor and iron guns, the rust of conventions and
formalities. If the rust was not on the tinned roofs and spires, it was
on the inhabitants.[366]

       *       *       *       *       *

2 P. M.—To Hubbard’s Meadow Grove.

The skunk-cabbage’s checkered fruit (spadix), one three inches long;
all parts of the flower but the anthers left and enlarged. _Bidens
cernua_, or nodding burr-marigold, like a small sunflower (with rays)
in Heywood Brook, _i. e._ beggar-tick. _Bidens connata_ (?), without
rays, in Hubbard’s Meadow. Blue-eyed grass still. Drooping neottia
very common. I see some yellow butterflies and others occasionally and
singly only. The smilax berries are mostly turned dark. I started a
great bittern from the weeds at the swimming-place.

It is very hot and dry weather. We have had no rain for a week, and
yet the pitcher-plants have water in them. Are they ever quite dry?
Are they not replenished by the dews always, and, being shaded by the
grass, saved from evaporation? What wells for the birds!

The white-red-purple-berried bush in Hubbard’s Meadow, whose berries
were fairest a fortnight ago, appears to be the _Viburnum nudum_,
or withe-rod. Our cornel (the common) with berries blue one side,
whitish the other, appears to be either the _Cornus sericea_ or _C.
stolonifera_ of Gray, _i. e._ the silky, or the red-osier cornel
(_osier rouge_), though its leaves are neither silky nor downy nor
rough.

This and the last four or five nights have been perhaps the most sultry
in the year thus far.


_Sept. 12._ Not till after 8 A. M. does the fog clear off so much that
I see the sun shining in patches on Nawshawtuct. This is the season of
fogs.

Like knight, like esquire. When Benvenuto Cellini was attacked by the
constables in Rome, his boy Cencio assisted him, or at least stood by,
and afterward related his master’s exploits; “and as they asked him
several times whether he had been afraid, he answered that they should
propose the question to me, for he had been affected upon the occasion
just in the same manner that I was.”

Benvenuto Cellini relates in his memoirs that, during his confinement
in the castle of St. Angelo in Rome, he had a terrible dream or vision
in which certain events were communicated to him which afterward
came to pass, and he adds: “From the very moment that I beheld the
phenomenon, there appeared (strange to relate!) a resplendent light
over my head, which has displayed itself conspicuously to all that
I have thought proper to show it to, but those were very few. This
shining light is to be seen in the morning over my shadow till two
o’clock in the afternoon, and it appears to the greatest advantage when
the grass is moist with dew: it is likewise visible in the evening
at sunset. This phenomenon I took notice of when I was at Paris,
because the air is exceedingly clear in that climate, so that I could
distinguish it there much plainer than in Italy, where mists are much
more frequent; but I can still see it even here, and show it to others,
though not to the same advantage as in France.” This reminds me of
the halo around my shadow which I notice from the causeway in the
morning,—also by moonlight,—as if, in the case of a man of an excitable
imagination, this were basis enough for his superstition.[367]

After I have spent the greater part of a night abroad in the moonlight,
I am obliged to sleep enough more the next night to make up for
it,—_Endymionis somnum dormire_ (to sleep an Endymion sleep), as the
ancients expressed it.[368] And there is something gained still by
thus turning the day into night. Endymion is said to have obtained of
Jupiter the privilege of sleeping as much as he would. Let no man be
afraid of sleep, if his weariness comes of obeying his Genius. He who
has spent the night with the gods sleeps more innocently by day than
the sluggard who has spent the day with the satyrs sleeps by night.
He who has travelled to fairyland in the night sleeps by day more
innocently than he who is fatigued by the merely trivial labors of the
day sleeps by night. That kind of life which, sleeping, we dream that
we live awake, in our walks by night, we, waking, live, while our daily
life appears as a dream.

       *       *       *       *       *

2 P. M.—To the Three Friends’ Hill beyond Flint’s Pond, _via_ railroad,
R. W. E.’s wood-path south side Walden, George Heywood’s cleared lot,
and Smith’s orchard; return _via_ east of Flint’s Pond, _via_ Goose
Pond and my old home to railroad.

I go to Flint’s Pond for the sake of the mountain view from the hill
beyond, looking over Concord. I have thought it the best, especially
in the winter, which I can get in this neighborhood. It is worth the
while to see the mountains in the horizon once a day. I have thus seen
some earth which corresponds to my least earthly and trivial, to my
most heavenward-looking, thoughts. The earth seen through an azure, an
ethereal, veil. They are the natural _temples_, elevated brows, of the
earth, looking at which, the thoughts of the beholder are naturally
elevated and sublimed,—etherealized. I wish to see the earth through
the medium of much air or heaven, for there is no paint like the air.
Mountains thus seen are worthy of worship. I go to Flint’s Pond also to
see a rippling lake and a reedy island in its midst,—Reed Island. A man
should feed his senses with the best that the land affords.[369]

At the entrance to the Deep Cut, I heard the telegraph-wire vibrating
like an æolian harp. It reminded me suddenly,—reservedly, with a
beautiful paucity of communication, even silently, such was its
effect on my thoughts,—it reminded me, I say, with a certain pathetic
moderation, of what finer and deeper stirrings I was susceptible,
which grandly set all argument and dispute aside, a triumphant
though transient exhibition of the truth. It told me by the faintest
imaginable strain, it told me by the finest strain that a human ear can
hear, yet conclusively and past all refutation, that there were higher,
infinitely higher, planes of life which it behooved me never to forget.
As I was entering the Deep Cut, the wind, which was conveying a message
to me from heaven, dropped it on the wire of the telegraph which it
vibrated as it passed. I instantly sat down on a stone at the foot of
the telegraph-pole, and attended to the communication. It merely said:
“Bear in mind, Child, and never for an instant forget, that there are
higher planes, infinitely higher planes, of life than this thou art
now travelling on. Know that the goal is distant, and is upward, and is
worthy all your life’s efforts to attain to.” And then it ceased, and
though I sat some minutes longer I heard nothing more.

There is every variety and degree of inspiration from mere fullness
of life to the most rapt mood. A human soul is played on even as
this wire, which now vibrates slowly and gently so that the passer
can hardly hear it, and anon the sound swells and vibrates with such
intensity as if it would rend the wire, as far as the elasticity and
tension of the wire permits, and now it dies away and is silent, and
though the breeze continues to sweep over it, no strain comes from
it, and the traveller hearkens in vain. It is no small gain to have
this wire stretched through Concord, though there may be no office
here. Thus I make my own use of the telegraph, without consulting the
directors, like the sparrows, which I perceive use it extensively
for a perch. Shall I not go to this office to hear if there is
any communication for me, as steadily as to the post-office in the
village?[370]

I can hardly believe that there is so great a difference between one
year and another as my journal shows. The 11th of this month last
year, the river was as high as it commonly is in the spring, over the
causeway on the Corner road. It is now quite low. Last year, October
9th, the huckleberries were fresh and abundant on Conantum. They are
now already dried up.

We yearn to see the mountains daily, as the Israelites yearned for the
promised land, and we daily live the fate of Moses, who only looked
into the promised land from Pisgah before he died.

On Monday, the 15th instant, I am going to perambulate the bounds of
the town. As I am partial to across-lot routes, this appears to be a
very proper duty for me to perform, for certainly no route can well
be chosen which shall be more across-lot, since the roads in no case
run round the town but ray out from its centre, and my course will lie
across each one. It is almost as if I had undertaken to walk round the
town at the greatest distance from its centre and at the same time from
the surrounding villages. There is no public house near the line. It
is a sort of reconnoissance of its frontiers authorized by the central
government of the town, which will bring the surveyor in contact with
whatever wild inhabitant or wilderness its territory embraces.

This appears to be a very ancient custom, and I find that this word
“perambulation” has exactly the same meaning that it has at present in
Johnson and Walker’s dictionary. A hundred years ago they went round
the towns of this State every three years. And the old selectmen tell
me that, before the present split stones were set up in 1829, the
bounds were marked by a heap of stones, and it was customary for each
selectman to add a stone to the heap.

Saw a pigeon-place on George Heywood’s cleared lot,—the six dead trees
set up for the pigeons to alight on, and the brush house close by to
conceal the man. I was rather startled to find such a thing going now
in Concord. The pigeons on the trees looked like fabulous birds with
their long tails and their pointed breasts. I could hardly believe
they were alive and not some wooden birds used for decoys, they sat
so still; and, even when they moved their necks, I thought it was the
effect of art. As they were not catching then, I approached and scared
away a dozen birds who were perched on the trees, and found that they
were freshly baited there, though the net was carried away, perchance
to some other bed. The smooth sandy bed was covered with buckwheat,
wheat or rye, and acorns. Sometimes they use corn, shaved off the ear
in its present state with a knife. There were left the sticks with
which they fastened the nets. As I stood there, I heard a rushing sound
and, looking up, saw a flock of thirty or forty pigeons dashing toward
the _trees_, who suddenly whirled on seeing me and circled round and
made a new dash toward the bed, as if they would fain alight if I had
not been there, then steered off. I crawled into the bough house and
lay awhile looking through the leaves, hoping to see them come again
and feed, but they did not while I stayed. This net and bed belong to
one Harrington of Weston, as I hear. Several men still take pigeons in
Concord every year; by a method, methinks, extremely old and which I
seem to have seen pictured in some old book of fables or symbols, and
yet few in Concord know exactly how it is done. And yet it is all done
for money and because the birds fetch a good price, just as the farmers
raise corn and potatoes. I am always expecting that those engaged in
such a pursuit will be somewhat less grovelling and mercenary than the
regular trader or farmer, but I fear that it is not so.

Found a violet, apparently _Viola cucullata_, or hood-leaved violet,
in bloom in Baker’s Meadow beyond Pine Hill; also the _Bidens cernua_,
nodding burr-marigold, with five petals, in same place. Went through
the old corn-field on the hillside beyond, now grown up to birches and
hickories,—woods where you feel the old corn-hills under your feet;
for these, not being disturbed or levelled in getting the crop, like
potato-hills, last an indefinite while; and by some they are called
Indian corn-fields, though I think erroneously, not only from their
position in rocky soil frequently, but because the squaws probably,
with their clamshells or thin stones or wooden hoes, did not hill their
corn more than many now recommend.

What we call woodbine is the _Vitis hederacea_, or common creeper, or
American ivy.

When I got into the Lincoln road, I perceived a singular sweet scent
in the air, which I suspected arose from some plant now in a peculiar
state owing to the season, but though I smelled everything around,
I could not detect it, but the more eagerly I smelled, the further
I seemed to be from finding it; but when I gave up the search, again
it would be wafted to me. It was one of the sweet scents which go to
make the autumn air, which fed my sense of smell rarely and dilated
my nostrils. I felt the better for it. Methinks that I possess the
sense of smell in greater perfection than usual, and have the habit
of smelling of every plant I pluck. How autumnal is the scent of ripe
grapes now by the roadside![371]

From the pond-side hill I perceive that the forest leaves begin to look
rather rusty or brown. The pendulous, drooping barberries are pretty
well reddened. I am glad when the berries look fair and plump. I love
to gaze at the low island in the pond,—at any island or inaccessible
land. The isle at which you look always seems fairer than the mainland
on which you stand.

I had already bathed in Walden as I passed, but now I forgot that I had
been wetted, and wanted to embrace and mingle myself with the water of
Flint’s Pond this warm afternoon, to get wet inwardly and deeply.

Found on the shore of the pond that singular willow-like herb in
blossom, though its petals were gone. It grows up two feet from
a large woody horizontal root, and droops over to the sand again,
meeting which, it puts out a myriad rootlets from the side of its stem,
fastens itself, and curves upward again to the air, thus spanning or
looping itself along. The bark just above the ground thickens into a
singular cellular or spongy substance, which at length appears to crack
nearer the earth, giving that part of the plant a winged and somewhat
four-sided appearance. It appears to be the cellular tissue, or what
is commonly called the green bark, and likewise invests the root to a
great thickness, somewhat like a fungus, and is of a fawn-color. The
_Lythrum verticillatum_, or swamp loosestrife, or grass poly, but I
think better named, as in Dewey, swamp-willow-herb.

The prinos berries are pretty red. Any redness like cardinal-flowers,
or poke, or the evening sky, or cheronæa, excites us as a red flag does
cows and turkeys.


_Sept. 13._ Railroad causeway, before sunrise.

Here is a morning after a warm, clear, moonlight night almost entirely
without dew or fog. It has been a little breezy through the night, it
is true; but why so great a difference between this and other mornings
of late? I can walk in any direction in the fields without wetting my
feet.

I see the same rays in the dun, buff, or fawn-colored sky now, just
twenty minutes before sunrise, though they do not extend quite so far
as at sundown the other night. Why these rays? What is it divides the
light of the sun? Is it thus divided by distant inequalities in the
surface of the earth, behind which the other parts are concealed, and
since the morning atmosphere is clearer they do not reach so far? Some
small island clouds are the first to look red.

The cross-leaved polygala emits its fragrance as if at will. You are
quite sure you smelled it and are ravished with its sweet fragrance,
but now it has no smell. You must not hold it too near, but hold it on
all sides and at all distances, and there will perchance be wafted to
you sooner or later a very sweet and penetrating fragrance. What it is
like you cannot surely tell, for you do not enjoy it long enough nor
in volume enough to compare it. It is very likely that you will not
discover any fragrance while you are rudely smelling at it; you can
only remember that you once perceived it. Both this and the caducous
polygala are now somewhat faded.

Now the sun is risen. The sky is almost perfectly clear this morning;
not a cloud in the horizon. The morning is not pensive like the
evening, but joyous and youthful, and its blush is soon gone. It is
unfallen day. The Bedford sunrise bell rings sweetly and musically at
this hour, when there is no bustle in the village to drown it. Bedford
deserves a vote of thanks from Concord for it. It is a great good at
these still and sacred hours, when towns can hear each other. It would
be nought at noon.


_Sept. 14._ A great change in the weather from sultry to cold, from one
thin coat to a thick coat or two thin ones.

2 P. M.—To Cliffs.

The dry grass yields a crisped sound to my feet. The white oak
which appears to have made part of a hedge fence once, now standing
in Hubbard’s fence near the Corner road, where it stretches along
horizontally, is (one of its arms, for it has one running each way)
two and a half feet thick, with a sprout growing perpendicularly out
of it eighteen inches in diameter. The corn-stalks standing in stacks,
in long rows along the edges of the corn-fields, remind me of stacks of
muskets.

  [Illustration]

As soon as berries are gone, grapes come. The chalices of the
_Rhexia Virginica_, deer-grass or meadow-beauty, are literally little
reddish chalices now, though many still have petals,—little cream
pitchers.[372] The caducous polygala in cool places is faded almost
white. I see the river at the foot of Fair Haven Hill running up-stream
before the strong cool wind, which here strikes it from the north. The
cold wind makes me shudder after my bath, before I get dressed.

_Polygonum aviculare_—knot-grass, goose-grass, or door-grass—still in
bloom.


_Sept. 15. Monday._ Ice in the pail under the pump, and quite a frost.

Commenced perambulating the town bounds. At 7.30 A. M. rode in company
with —— and Mr. —— to the bound between Acton and Concord near Paul
Dudley’s. Mr. —— told a story of his wife walking in the fields
somewhere, and, to keep the rain off, throwing her gown over her head
and holding it in her mouth, and so being poisoned about her mouth from
the skirts of her dress having come in contact with poisonous plants.
At Dudley’s, which house is handsomely situated, with five large elms
in front, we met the selectmen of Acton, —— —— and —— ——. Here were
five of us. It appeared that we weighed, — —— I think about 160, ——
155, —— about 140, —— 130, myself 127. —— described the wall about
or at Forest Hills Cemetery in Roxbury as being made of stones upon
which they were careful to preserve the moss, so that it cannot be
distinguished from a very old wall.

Found one intermediate bound-stone near the powder-mill drying-house on
the bank of the river. The workmen there wore shoes without iron tacks.
He said that the kernel-house was the most dangerous, the drying-house
next, the press-house next. One of the powder-mill buildings in
Concord? The potato vines and the beans which were still green are now
blackened and flattened by the frost.