Chapter XV JULY, 1851.

_July 2._ It is a fresh, cool summer morning. From the road at N.
Barrett’s, on my way to P. Blood’s at 8.30 A. M., the Great Meadows
have a slight bluish misty tinge in part; elsewhere a sort of hoary
sheen like a fine downiness, inconceivably fine and silvery far
away,—the light reflected from the grass blades, a sea of grass hoary
with light, the counterpart of the frost in spring. As yet no mower
has profaned it; scarcely a footstep since the waters left it. Miles of
waving grass adorning the surface of the earth.

Last night, a sultry night which compelled to leave all windows open,
I heard two travellers talking aloud, was roused out of my sleep by
their loud, day-like, and somewhat unearthly discourse at perchance
one o’clock. From the country, whiling away the night with loud
discourse. I heard the words “Theodore Parker” and “Wendell Phillips”
loudly spoken, and so did half a dozen of my neighbors, who also were
awakened. Such is fame. It affected [me] like Dante talking of the men
of this world in the infernal regions. If the travellers had called my
own name I should equally have thought it an unearthly personage which
it would take me some hours into daylight to realize. O traveller,
haven’t you got any further than that? My genius hinted before I fairly
awoke, “Improve your time.” What is the night that a traveller’s voice
should sound so hollow in it? that a man speaking aloud in the night,
speaking in regions under the earth, should utter the words “Theodore
Parker”?

A traveller! I love his title. A traveller is to be reverenced as such.
His profession is the best symbol of our life. Going from —— toward
——; it is the history of every one of us. I am interested in those that
travel in the night.

It takes but little distance to make the hills and even the meadows
look blue to-day. That principle which gives the air an azure color is
more abundant.

To-day the milkweed is blossoming. Some of the raspberries are ripe,
the most innocent and simple of fruits, the purest and most ethereal.
Cherries are ripe. Strawberries in the gardens have passed their prime.

Many large trees, especially elms, about a house are a surer indication
of old family distinction and worth than any evidence of wealth. Any
evidence of care bestowed on these trees secures the traveller’s
respect as for a nobler husbandry than the raising of corn and
potatoes.

I passed a regular country dooryard this forenoon, the unpainted
one-story house, long and low with projecting stoop, a deep grass-plot
unfenced for yard, hens and chickens scratching amid the chip dirt
about the door,—this last the main feature, relics of wood-piles, sites
of the wooden towers.

The nightshade has bloomed and the prinos, or winterberry.


_July 5._ The vetch-like flower by the Marlborough road, the _Tephrosia
Virginica_, is in blossom, with mixed red and yellowish blossoms.
Also the white fine-flowered Jersey tea (_Ceanothus Americana_), and,
by the side of wood-paths, the humble cow-wheat (_Apocynum_, etc.).
The blue flower by the roadside, slender but pretty spike, is the
pale lobelia (_L. pallida_). The reddish blossoms of the umbelled
wintergreen (_Pyrola umbellata_) are now in perfection and are
exceedingly beautiful. Also the white sweet-scented flowers of the _P.
rotundifolia_.

It is a remarkably cool, clear, breezy atmosphere to-day. One would
say there were fewer flowers just now than there have been and are to
be; _i. e._ we do not look so much for the blossoming of new flowers.
The earliest small fruits are just beginning to be ripe,—the raspberry,
thimble-berry, blueberry, etc. We have no longer the blossoms of those
which must ripen their fruits in early autumn.

I am interested in those fields in the woods where the potato is
cultivated, growing in the light, dry, sandy soil, free from weeds; now
in blossom, the slight vine not crowded in the hill. I think they do
not promise many potatoes, though mealy and wholesome like nuts. Many
fields have now received their last hoeing, and the farmers’ work seems
to be soon over with them. What a pleasant interview he must have had
with them! What a liberal education with these professors! Better than
a university. It is pleasing to consider man’s cultivating this plant
thus assiduously, without reference to any crop it may yield him, as if
he were to cultivate johnswort in like manner. What influences does he
receive from this long intercourse.

The flowers of the umbelled pyrola, or common wintergreen, are
really very handsome now, dangling red from their little umbels like
jewelry,—especially the unexpanded buds with their red calyx-leaves
against the white globe of petals.

There is a handsome wood-path on the east side of White Pond. The
shadows of the pine stems and branches falling across the path, which
is perfectly red with pine-needles, make a very handsome carpet. Here
is a small road running north and south along the edge of the wood,
which would be a good place to walk by moonlight.

The calamint grows by the lane beyond Seven-Star Lane; now in blossom.

As we come over Hubbard’s Bridge between 5 and 6 P. M., the sun
getting low, a cool wind blowing up the valley, we sit awhile on the
rails which are destined for the new railing. The light on the Indian
hill is very soft and glorious, giving the idea of the most wonderful
fertility. The most barren hills are gilded like waving grain-fields.
What a paradise to sail by! The cliffs and woods up the stream are
nearer and have more shadow and actuality about them. This retired
bridge is a favorite spot with me. I have witnessed many a fair sunset
from it.


_July 6. Sunday._ I walked by night last moon, and saw its disk
reflected in Walden Pond, the broken disk, now here, now there, a
pure and memorable flame unearthly bright, like a cucullo[216] of a
water-bug. Ah! but that first faint tinge of moonlight on the gap!
(seen some time ago),[217]—a silvery light from the east before day had
departed in the west. What an immeasurable interval there is between
the first tinge of moonlight which we detect, lighting with mysterious,
silvery, poetic light the western slopes, like a paler grass, and the
last wave of daylight on the eastern slopes! It is wonderful how our
senses ever span so vast an interval, how from being aware of the one
we become aware of the other. And now the night wind blows,—from where?
What gave it birth? It suggests an interval equal to that between
the most distant periods recorded in history. The silver age is not
more distant from the golden than moonlight is from sunlight. I am
looking into the west, where the red clouds still indicate the course
of departing day. I turn and see the silent, spiritual, contemplative
moonlight shedding the softest imaginable light on the western slopes
of the hills, as if, after a thousand years of polishing, their
surfaces were just beginning to be bright,—a pale whitish lustre.
Already the crickets chirp to the moon a different strain, and the
night wind rustles the leaves of the wood. A different dynasty has
commenced. Yet moonlight, like daylight, is more valuable for what
it suggests than for what it actually is. It is a long past season of
which I dream. And the reason is perchance because it is a more sacred
and glorious season, to which I instantly refer all glorious actions in
past time. Let a nobler landscape present itself, let a purer air blow,
and I locate all the worthies of the world. Ah, there is the mysterious
light which for some hours has illustrated Asia and the scene of
Alexander’s victories, now at length, after two or three hours spent
in surmounting the billows of the Atlantic, come to shine on America.
There, on that illustrated sand-bank, was revealed an antiquity beside
which Nineveh is young. Such a light as sufficed for the earliest ages.
From what star has it arrived on this planet? Yet even at midday I
see the full moon shining in the sky. What if, in some vales, only its
light is reflected? What if there are some spirits which walk in its
light alone still? who separate the moonlight from the sunlight, and
are shined on by the former only? I passed from dynasty to dynasty,
from one age of the world to another age of the world, from Jove
perchance back to Saturn. What river of Lethe was there to run between?
I bade farewell to that light setting in the west and turned to salute
the new light rising in the east.

There is some advantage in being the humblest, cheapest, least
dignified man in the village, so that the very stable boys shall damn
you. Methinks I enjoy that advantage to an unusual extent. There is
many a coarsely well-meaning fellow, who knows only the skin of me, who
addresses me familiarly by my Christian name. I get the whole good of
him and lose nothing myself. There is “Sam,” the jailer,—whom I never
call Sam, however,—who exclaimed last evening: “Thoreau, are you going
up the street pretty soon? Well, just take a couple of these handbills
along and drop one in at Hoar’s piazza and one at Holbrook’s, and
I’ll do as much for you another time.” I am not above being used, aye
abused, sometimes.

The red clover heads are now turned black. They no longer impart that
rosaceous tinge to the meadows and fertile fields. It is but a short
time that their rich bloom lasts. The white is black or withering
also. Whiteweed still looks white in the fields. Blue-eyed grass is
now rarely seen. The grass in the fields and meadows is not so fresh
and fair as it was a fortnight ago. It is dryer and riper and ready for
the mowers. Now June is past. June is the month for grass and flowers.
Now grass is turning to hay, and flowers to fruits. Already I gather
ripe blueberries on the hills. The red-topped grass is in its prime,
tingeing the fields with red.

It is a free, flowing wind, with wet clouds in the sky, though the
sun shines. The distant hills look unusually near in this atmosphere.
Acton meeting-houses seen to stand on the side of some hills, Nagog or
Nashoba, beyond, as never before. Nobscot looks like a high pasture in
the sunlight not far off. From time to time I hear a few drops of rain
falling on the leaves, but none is felt and the sun does not cease to
shine. All serious showers go round me and get out of my way.

The clasping harebell is certainly a pretty flower, and so is the
tephrosia. The poke has blossomed and the indigo-weed.


_July 7._ The intimations of the night are divine, methinks. Men
might meet in the morning and report the news of the night,—what
divine suggestions have been made to them. I find that I carry with
me into the day often some such hint derived from the gods,—such
impulses to purity, to heroism, to literary effort even, as are never
day-born.[218]

One of those mornings which usher in no day, but rather an endless
morning, a protracted auroral season, for clouds prolong the twilight
the livelong day.

And now that there is an interregnum in the blossoming of the flowers,
so is there in the singing of the birds. The golden robin is rarely
heard, and the bobolink, etc.

I rejoice when in a dream I have loved virtue and nobleness.

Where is Grecian history? It is when in the morning I recall the
intimations of the night.

       *       *       *       *       *

The moon is now more than half full. When I come through the village
at 10 o’clock this cold night, cold as in May, the heavy shadows of
the elms covering the ground with their rich tracery impress me as
if men had got so much more than they had bargained for, not only
trees to stand in the air, but to checker the ground with their
shadows. At night they lie along the earth. They tower, they arch,
they droop over the streets like chandeliers of darkness. In my walk
the other afternoon, I saw the sun shining into the depths of a thick
pine wood, checkering the ground like moonlight and illuminating the
lichen-covered bark of a large white pine, from which it was reflected
through the surrounding thicket as from another sun. This was so deep
in the woods that you would have said no sun could penetrate thither.

I have been to-night with Anthony Wright to look through Perez Blood’s
telescope a second time. A dozen of Blood’s neighbors were swept along
in the stream of our curiosity. One who lived half a mile this side
said that Blood had been down that way within a day or two with his
terrestrial, or day, glass, looking into the eastern horizon [at]
the hills of Billerica, Burlington, and Woburn. I was amused to see
what sort of respect this man with a telescope had obtained from his
neighbors, something akin to that which savages award to civilized men,
though in this case the interval between the parties was very slight.
Mr. Blood, with his skull-cap on, his short figure, his north European
figure, made me think of Tycho Brahe. He did not invite us into his
house this cool evening,—men nor women,—nor did he ever before to my
knowledge. I am still contented to see the stars with my naked eye. Mr.
Wright asked him what his instrument cost. He answered, “Well, that
is something I don’t like to tell.” (Stuttering or hesitating in his
speech a little as usual.) “It is a very proper question, however.”
“Yes,” said I, “and you think that you have given a very proper
answer.”

Returning, my companion, Wright, the sexton, told me how dusty he
found it digging a grave that afternoon,—for one who had been a pupil
of mine. For two feet, he said, notwithstanding the rain, he found the
soil as dry as ashes.

With a certain wariness, but not without a slight shudder at the
danger oftentimes, I perceive how near I had come to admitting into
my mind the details of some trivial affair, as a case at court; and
I am astonished to observe how willing men are to lumber their minds
with such rubbish,—to permit idle rumors, tales, incidents, even of an
insignificant kind, to intrude upon what should be the sacred ground of
the thoughts. Shall the temple of our thought be a public arena where
the most trivial affairs of the market and the gossip of the tea-table
is discussed,—a dusty, noisy, trivial place? Or shall it be a quarter
of heaven itself, a place consecrated to the service of the gods, a
hypæthral temple? I find it so difficult to dispose of the few facts
which to me are significant, that I hesitate to burden my mind with
the most insignificant, which only a divine mind could illustrate.
Such is, for the most part, the news,—in newspapers and conversation.
It is important to preserve the mind’s chastity in this respect. Think
of admitting the details of a single case of the criminal court into
the mind, to stalk profanely through its very _sanctum sanctorum_
for an hour, aye, for many hours! to make a very bar-room of your
mind’s inmost apartment, as if for a moment the dust of the street
had occupied you, aye, the very street itself, with all its travel,
passed through your very mind of minds, your thoughts’ shrine, with
all its filth and bustle! Would it not be an intellectual suicide? By
all manner of boards and traps, threatening the extreme penalty of the
divine law, excluding trespassers from these grounds, it behooves us
to preserve the purity and sanctity of the mind.[219] It is so hard
to forget what it is worse than useless to remember. If I am to be a
channel or thoroughfare, I prefer that it be of the mountain springs,
and not the town sewers,—the Parnassian streams. There is inspiration,
the divine gossip which comes to the ear of the attentive mind from
the courts of heaven; there is the profane and stale revelation of the
bar-room and the police court. The same ear is fitted to receive both
communications. Only the character of the individual determines to
which source chiefly it shall be open and to which closed. I believe
that the mind can be profaned by the habit of attending to trivial
things, so that all our thoughts shall be tinged with triviality. They
shall be dusty as stones in the street. Our very minds shall be paved
and macadamized, as it were, their foundation broken into fragments
for the wheels of travel to roll over. If we have thus desecrated
ourselves, the remedy will be, by circumspection and wariness, by our
aspiration and devotion, to consecrate ourselves, to make a fane of the
mind. I think that we should treat our minds as innocent and ingenuous
children whose guardians we are,—be careful what objects and what
subjects we thrust on their attention. Even the facts of science may
dust the mind by their dryness, unless they are in a sense effaced each
morning, or rather rendered fertile by the dews of fresh and living
truth. Every thought that passes through the mind helps to wear and
tear it, and to deepen the ruts, which, as in the streets of Pompeii,
evince how much it has been used. How many things there are concerning
which we might well deliberate whether we had better know them![220]
Routine, conventionality, manners, etc., etc.,—how insensibly an undue
attention to these dissipates and impoverishes the mind, robs it of its
simplicity and strength, emasculates it!

Knowledge does not come to us by details but by _lieferungs_ from the
gods. What else is it to wash and purify ourselves? Conventionalities
are as bad as impurities.[221] Only thought which is expressed by
the mind in repose—as it were, lying on its back and contemplating
the heavens—is adequately and fully expressed. What are sidelong,
transient, passing half-views? The writer expressing his thought must
be as well seated as the astronomer contemplating the heavens; he must
not occupy a constrained position. The facts, the experience, we are
well poised upon! which secures our whole attention!

The senses of children are unprofaned. Their whole body is one sense;
they take a physical pleasure in riding on a rail, they love to
teeter. So does the unviolated, the unsophisticated mind derive an
inexpressible pleasure from the simplest exercise of thoughts.

I can express adequately only the thought which I _love_ to express.
All the faculties in repose but the one you are using, the whole energy
concentrated in that. Be ever so little distracted, your thoughts
so little confused, your engagements so few, your attention so free,
your existence so mundane, that in all places and in all hours you can
hear the sound of crickets in those seasons when they are to be heard.
It is a mark of serenity and health of mind when a person hears this
sound much,—in streets of cities as well as in fields. Some ears never
hear this sound; are called deaf. Is it not because they have so long
attended to other sounds?


_July 8. Tuesday._ Walked along the Clamshell bank after sundown. A
cloudy sky. The heads of the grass in the pasture behind Dennis’s have
a reddish cast, but another grass, with a lighter-colored stem and
leaves, on the higher parts of the field gives a yellowish tinge to
those parts, as if they reflected a misty sunlight. Even much later in
the night these light spots were distinguishable. I am struck by the
cool, juicy, pickled-cucumber green of the potato-fields now. How lusty
these vines look! The pasture naturally exhibits at this season no such
living green as the cultivated fields. I perceive that flower of the
lowlands now, with a peculiar leaf and conspicuous white umbels.[222]

  [Illustration]

Here are mulleins covering a field (the Clamshell field) where three
years [ago] were none noticeable, but a smooth uninterrupted pasture
sod. Two years ago it was plowed for the first time for many years,
and millet and corn and potatoes planted, and now _where the millet
grew_ these mulleins have sprung up. Who can write the history of
these fields? The millet does not perpetuate itself, but the few seeds
of the mullein, which perchance were brought here with it, are still
multiplying the race.

The thick heads of the yellow dock warn me of the lapse of time.

Here are some rich rye-fields waving over all the land, their heads
nodding in the evening breeze with an apparently alternating motion;
_i. e._ they do not all bend at once by ranks, but separately, and
hence this agreeable alternation. How rich a sight this cereal fruit,
now yellow for the cradle,—_flavus_! It is an impenetrable phalanx.
I walk for half a mile beside these Macedonians, looking in vain for
an opening. There is no Arnold Winkelried to gather these spear-heads
upon his breast and make an opening for me. This is food for man.
The earth labors not in vain; it is bearing its burden. The yellow,
waving, rustling rye extends far up and over the hills on either side,
a kind of pinafore to nature, leaving only a narrow and dark passage
at the bottom of a deep ravine. How rankly it has grown! How it hastes
to maturity! I discover that there is such a goddess as Ceres. These
long grain-fields which you must respect,—must go round,—occupying
the ground like an army. The small trees and shrubs seen dimly in
its midst are overwhelmed by the grain as by an inundation. They are
seen only as indistinct forms of bushes and green leaves mixed with
the yellow stalks. There are certain crops which give me the idea
of bounty, of the _Alma Natura_.[223] They are the grains. Potatoes
do not so fill the lap of earth. This rye excludes everything else
and takes possession of the soil. The farmer says, “Next year I will
raise a crop of rye;” and he proceeds to clear away the brush, and
either plows it, or, if it is too uneven or stony, burns and harrows
it only, and scatters the seed with faith. And all winter the earth
keeps his secret,—unless it did leak out somewhat in the fall,—and in
the spring this early green on the hillsides betrays him. When I see
this luxuriant crop spreading far and wide in spite of rock and bushes
and unevenness of ground, I cannot help thinking that it must have
been unexpected by the farmer himself, and regarded by him as a lucky
accident for which to thank fortune. This, to reward a transient faith,
the gods had given. As if he must have forgotten that he did it, until
he saw the waving grain inviting his sickle.


_July 9._ When I got out of the cars at Porter’s, Cambridge, this
morning, I was pleased to see the handsome blue flowers of the succory
or endive (_Cichorium Intybus_), which reminded me that within the hour
I had been whirled into a new botanical region. They must be extremely
rare, if they occur at all, in Concord. This weed is handsomer than
most garden flowers. Saw there also the _Cucubalus Behen_, or bladder
campion, also the autumnal dandelion (_Apargia autumnalis_).

Visited the Observatory. Bond said they were cataloguing the stars
at Washington (?), or trying to. They do not at Cambridge; of no
use with their force. Have not force enough now to make mag[netic]
obs[ervations]. When I asked if an observer with the small telescope
could find employment, he said, Oh yes, there was employment enough for
observation with the naked eye, observing the changes in the brilliancy
of stars, etc., etc., if they could only get some good observers. One
is glad to hear that the naked eye still retains some importance in the
estimation of astronomers.

Coming out of town,—willingly as usual,—when I saw that reach of
Charles River just above the depot, the fair, still water this cloudy
evening suggesting the way to eternal peace and beauty, whence it
flows, the placid, lake-like fresh water, so unlike the salt brine,
affected me not a little. I was reminded of the way in which Wordsworth
so coldly speaks of some natural visions or scenes “giving him
pleasure.” This is perhaps the first vision of elysium on this route
from Boston. And just then I saw an encampment of Penobscots, their
wigwams appearing above the railroad fence, they, too, looking up the
river as they sat on the ground, and enjoying the scene. What can be
more impressive than to look up a noble river just at evening,—one,
perchance, which you have never explored,—and behold its placid waters,
reflecting the woods and sky, lapsing inaudibly toward the ocean; to
behold as a lake, but know it as a river, tempting the beholder to
explore it and his own destiny at once? Haunt of waterfowl. This was
above the factories,—all that I saw. That water could never have flowed
under a factory. How _then_ could it have reflected the sky?


_July 10._ A gorgeous sunset after rain, with horizontal bars of
clouds, red sashes to the western window, barry clouds hanging like
a curtain over the window of the west, damask. First there is a
low arch of the storm clouds in the west, under which is seen the
clearer, fairer, serener sky and more distant sunset clouds, and under
all, on the horizon’s edge, heavier, massive dark clouds, not to be
distinguished from the mountains. How many times I have seen this kind
of sunset,—the most gorgeous sight in nature! From the hill behind
Minott’s I see the birds flying against this red sky, the sun having
set; one looks like a bat. Now between two stupendous mountains of the
low stratum under the evening red, clothed in slightly rosaceous amber
light, through a magnificent gorge, far, far away, as perchance may
occur in pictures of the Spanish coast viewed from the Mediterranean,
I see a city, the eternal city of the west, the phantom city, in whose
streets no traveller has trod, over whose pavements the horses of the
sun have already hurried, some Salamanca of the imagination. But it
lasts only for a moment, for now the changing light has wrought such
changes in it that I see the resemblance no longer.

A softer amber sky than in any picture. The swallows are improving
this short day, twittering as they fly, and the huckleberry-bird[224]
repeats his jingling strain, and the song sparrow, more honest than
most.

I am always struck by the centrality of the observer’s position. He
always stands fronting the middle of the arch, and does not suspect at
first that a thousand observers on a thousand hills behold the sunset
sky from equally favorable positions.

And now I turn and observe the dark masses of the trees in the east,
not green but black. While the sun was setting in the west, the trees
were rising in the east.

I perceive that the low stratum of dark clouds under the red sky all
dips one way, and to a remarkable degree presents the appearance of the
butt ends of cannons slanted toward the sky, thus:—

  [Illustration]

Such uniformity on a large scale is unexpected and pleasant to detect,
evincing the simplicity of the laws of their formation. Uniformity in
the shapes of clouds of a single stratum is always to be detected, the
same wind shaping clouds of the like consistency and in like positions.
No doubt an experienced observer could discover the states of the upper
atmosphere by studying the forms and characters of the clouds. I traced
the distinct form of the cannon in seven instances, stretching over the
whole length of the cloud, many a mile in the horizon.

And the nighthawk dashes past in the twilight with mottled (?) wing,
within a rod of me.


_July 11. Friday._ At 7.15 P. M. with W. E. C. go forth to see the
moon, the glimpses of the moon. We think she is not quite full; we
can detect a little flatness on the eastern side. Shall we wear thick
coats? The day has been warm enough, but how cool will the night be?
It is not sultry, as the last night. As a general rule, it is best to
wear your thickest coat even in a July night. Which way shall we walk?
Northwest, that we may see the moon returning? But on that side the
river prevents our walking in the fields, and on other accounts that
direction is not so attractive. We go toward Bear Garden Hill. The sun
is setting. The meadow-sweet has bloomed. These dry hills and pastures
are the places to walk by moonlight. The moon is silvery still, not
yet inaugurated. The tree-tops are seen against the amber west. I seem
to see the outlines of one spruce among them, distinguishable afar.
My thoughts expand and flourish most on this barren hill, where in
the twilight I see the moss spreading in rings and prevailing over the
short, thin grass, carpeting the earth, adding a few inches of green to
its circle annually while it dies within.

As we round the sandy promontory, we try the sand and rocks with our
hands. The sand is cool on the surface but warmer a few inches beneath,
though the contrast is not so great as it was in May. The larger
rocks are perceptibly warm. I pluck the blossom of the milkweed in the
twilight and find how sweet it smells. The white blossoms of the Jersey
tea dot the hillside, with the yarrow everywhere. Some woods are black
as clouds; if we knew not they were green by day, they would appear
blacker still. When we sit, we hear the mosquitoes hum. The woodland
paths are not the same by night as by day; if they are a little grown
up, the eye cannot find them, but must give the reins to the feet, as
the traveller to his horse. So we went through the aspens at the base
of the Cliffs, their round leaves reflecting the lingering twilight on
the one side, the waxing moonlight on the other. Always the path was
unexpectedly open.

Now we are getting into moonlight. We see it reflected from particular
stumps in the depths of the darkest woods, and from the stems of
trees, as if it selected what to shine on,[225]—a silvery light. It
is a light, of course, which we have had all day, but which we have
not appreciated, and proves how remarkable a lesser light can be when
a greater has departed. How simply and naturally the moon presides!
’T is true she was eclipsed by the sun, but now she acquires an
almost equal respect and worship by reflecting and representing him,
with some new quality, perchance, added to his light, showing how
original the disciple may be who still in midday is seen, though pale
and cloud-like, beside his master. Such is a worthy disciple. In his
master’s presence he still is seen and preserves a distinct existence;
and in his absence he reflects and represents him, not without adding
some new quality to his light, not servile and never rival. As the
master withdraws himself, the disciple, who was a pale cloud before,
begins to emit a silvery light, acquiring at last a tinge of golden
as the darkness deepens, but not enough to scorch the seeds which have
been planted or to dry up the fertilizing dews which are falling.

Passing now near Well Meadow Head toward Baker’s orchard. The
sweet-fern and indigo-weed fill the path up to one’s middle, wetting
us with dews so high. The leaves are shining and flowing.[226] We
wade through the luxuriant vegetation, seeing no bottom. Looking back
toward the Cliffs, some dead trees in the horizon, high on the rocks,
make a wild New Hampshire prospect. There is the faintest possible
mist over the pond-holes, where the frogs are eructating, like the
falling of huge drops, the bursting of mephitic air-bubbles rising from
the bottom, a sort of blubbering,—such conversation as I _have_ heard
between men, a belching conversation, expressing a sympathy of stomachs
and abdomens. The peculiar appearance of the indigo-weed, its misty
massiveness, is striking. In Baker’s orchard the thick grass looks like
a sea of mowing in this weird moonlight, a bottomless sea of grass.
Our feet must be imaginative, must know the earth in imagination only,
as well as our heads. We sit on the fence, and, where it is broken
and interrupted, the fallen and slanting rails are lost in the grass
(really thin and wiry) as in water. We even see our tracks a long way
behind, where we have brushed off the dew. The clouds are peculiarly
wispy to-night, somewhat like fine flames, not massed and dark nor
downy, not thick, but slight, thin wisps of mist.

I hear the sound of Heywood’s Brook falling into Fair Haven Pond,
inexpressibly refreshing to my senses. It seems to flow through my
very bones. I hear it with insatiable thirst. It allays some sandy heat
in me. It affects my circulations; methinks my arteries have sympathy
with it. What is it I hear but the pure waterfalls within me, in the
circulation of my blood, the streams that fall into my heart? What
mists do I ever see but such as hang over and rise from my blood? The
sound of this gurgling water, running thus by night as by day, falls
on all my dashes, fills all my buckets, overflows my float-boards,
turns all the machinery of my nature, makes me a flume, a sluice-way,
to the springs of nature. Thus I am washed; thus I drink and quench my
thirst.[227] Where the streams fall into the lake, if they are only a
few inches more elevated, all walkers may hear.

On the high path through Baker’s wood I see, or rather feel, the
tephrosia. Now we come out into the open pasture. And under those woods
of elm and buttonwood, where still no light is seen, repose a family
of human beings. By night there is less to distinguish this locality
from the woods and meadows we have threaded. We might go very near to
farmhouses covered with ornamental trees and standing on a highroad,
thinking that [we] were in the most retired woods and fields still.
Having yielded to sleep, man is a less obtrusive inhabitant of nature.
Now, having reached the dry pastures again, we are surrounded by a
flood of moonlight. The dim cart-path over the sward curves gracefully
through the pitch pines, ever to some more fairy-like spot. The rails
in the fences shine like silver. We know not whether we are sitting on
the ruins of a wall, or the materials which are to compose a new one.
I see, half a mile off, a phosphorescent arc on the hillside, where
Bartlett’s Cliff reflects the moonlight. Going by the shanty, I smell
the excrements of its inhabitants, which I had never smelt before.

And now, at half-past 10 o’clock, I hear the cockerels crow in
Hubbard’s barns, and morning is already anticipated. It is the
feathered, wakeful thought in us that anticipates the following day.
This sound is wonderfully exhilarating at all times. These birds are
worth far more to me for their crowing and cackling than for their
drumsticks and eggs.[228] How singular the connection of the hen with
man,—that she leaves her eggs in his barns always! She is a domestic
fowl, though still a little shyish of him. I cannot [help] looking at
the whole as an experiment still and wondering that in each case it
succeeds. There is no doubt at last but hens may be kept. They will put
their eggs in your barn by a tacit agreement. They will not wander far
from your yard.


_July 12._ 8 P. M.—Now at least the moon is full, and I walk alone,
which is best by night, if not by day always. Your companion must
sympathize with the present mood. The conversation must be located
where the walkers are, and vary exactly with the scene and events and
the contour of the ground. Farewell to those who will talk of nature
unnaturally, whose presence is an interruption. I know but one with
whom I can walk. I might as well be sitting in a bar-room with them as
walk and talk with most. We are never side by side in our thoughts, and
we cannot hear each other’s silence. Indeed, we cannot be silent. We
are forever breaking silence, that is all, and mending nothing. How can
they keep together who are going different ways!

I start a sparrow from her three eggs in the grass, where she had
settled for the night. The earliest corn is beginning to show its
tassels now, and I scent it as I walk,—its peculiar dry scent.[229]
(This afternoon I gathered ripe blackberries, and felt as if the autumn
had commenced.) Now perchance many sounds and sights only remind
me that they once said something to me, and are so by association
interesting. I go forth to be reminded of a previous state of
existence, if perchance any memento of it is to be met with hereabouts.
I have no doubt that Nature preserves her integrity. Nature is in as
rude health as when Homer sang. We may at last by our sympathies be
well. I see a skunk on Bear Garden Hill stealing noiselessly away from
me, while the moon shines over the pitch pines, which send long shadows
down the hill. Now, looking back, I see it shining on the south side
of farmhouses and barns with a weird light, for I pass here half an
hour later than last night. I smell the huckleberry bushes. I hear
a human voice,—some laborer singing after his day’s toil,—which I do
not often hear. Loud it must be, for it is far away. Methinks I should
know it for a white man’s voice. Some strains have the melody of an
instrument. Now I hear the sound of a bugle in the “Corner,” reminding
me of poetic wars; a few flourishes and the bugler has gone to rest.
At the foot of the Cliff hill I hear the sound of the clock striking
nine, as distinctly as within a quarter of a mile usually, though there
is no wind. The moonlight is more perfect than last night; hardly a
cloud in the sky,—only a few fleecy ones. There is more serenity and
more light. I hear that sort of throttled or chuckling note as of a
bird flying high, now from this side, then from that.[230] Methinks
when I turn my head I see Wachusett from the side of the hill. I smell
the butter-and-eggs as I walk. I am startled by the rapid transit of
some wild animal across my path, a rabbit or a fox,—or you hardly know
if it be not a bird. Looking down from the cliffs, the leaves of the
tree-tops shine more than ever by day. Here and there a lightning-bug
shows his greenish light over the tops of the trees.

As I return through the orchard, a foolish robin bursts away from
his perch unnaturally, with the habits of man. The air is remarkably
still and unobjectionable on the hilltop, and the whole world below
is covered as with a gossamer blanket of moonlight. It is just about
as yellow as a blanket. It is a great dimly burnished shield with
darker blotches on its surface. You have lost some light, it is true,
but you have got this simple and magnificent stillness, brooding like
genius.[231]


_July 13._ Observed yesterday, while surveying near Gordon’s, a bittern
flying over near Gordon’s, with moderate flight and outstretched neck,
its breast-bone sticking out sharp like the bone in the throats of
some persons, its anatomy exposed. The evergreen is very handsome in
the woods now, rising somewhat spirally in a round tower of five or
six stories, surmounted by a long bud. Looking across the river to
Conantum from the open plains, I think how the history of the hills
would read, since they have been pastured by cows, if every plowing
and mowing and sowing and chopping were recorded. I hear, 4 P. M., a
pigeon woodpecker on a dead pine near by, uttering a harsh and scolding
scream, spying me. The chewink jingles on the tops of the bushes, and
the rush sparrow,[232] the vireo, and oven-bird at a distance; and a
robin sings, superior to all; and a barking dog has started something
on the opposite side of the river; and now the wood thrush surpasses
them all. These plains are covered with shrub oaks, birches, aspens,
hickories, mingled with sweet-fern and brakes and huckleberry bushes
and epilobium, now in bloom, and much fine grass. The hellebore by the
brooksides has now fallen over, though it is not broken off. The cows
now repose and chew the cud under the shadow of a tree, or crop the
grass in the shade along the side of the woods, and when you approach
to observe them they mind you just enough. I turn up the _Juniperus
repens_, and see the lighter color of its leaves on the under sides,
and its berries with three petal-like divisions in one end. The
sweet-scented life-everlasting is budded.

This might be called the Hayer’s or Haymaker’s Moon, for I perceive
that when the day has been oppressively warm the haymakers rest at noon
and resume their mowing after sunset, sometimes quite into evening.


_July 14._ Passing over the Great Fields (where I have been surveying
a road) this forenoon, where were some early turnips, the county
commissioners plucked and pared them with their knives and ate them.
I, too, tried hard to chew a mouthful of raw turnip and realize the
life of cows and oxen, for it might be a useful habit in extremities.
These things occur as the seasons revolve. These are things which
travellers will do. How many men have tasted a raw turnip! How few have
eaten a whole one! Some bovine appetites, which find some fodder in
every field. For like reasons we sometimes eat sorrel and say we love
it, that we may return the hospitality of Nature by exhibiting a good
appetite.

The citizen looks sharp to see if there is any dogwood or poison sumach
in the swamp before he enters.

If I take the same walk by moonlight an hour later or earlier in the
evening, it is as good as a different one. I love the night for its
novelty; it is less prophaned than the day.[233]

The creaking of the crickets seems at the very foundation of all sound.
At last I cannot tell it from a ringing in my ears. It is a sound from
within, not without. You cannot dispose of it by listening to it. In
proportion as I am stilled I hear it. It reminds me that I am a denizen
of the earth.


_July 16. Wednesday._ Methinks my present experience is nothing; my
past experience is all in all. I think that no experience which I
have to-day comes up to, or is comparable with, the experiences of my
boyhood. And not only this is true, but as far back as I can remember
I have unconsciously referred to the experiences of a previous state of
existence. “For life is a forgetting,” etc. Formerly, methought, nature
developed as I developed, and grew up with me. My life was ecstasy.
In youth, before I lost any of my senses, I can remember that I was
all alive, and inhabited my body with inexpressible satisfaction; both
its weariness and its refreshment were sweet to me. This earth was the
most glorious musical instrument, and I was audience to its strains. To
have such sweet impressions made on us, such ecstasies begotten of the
breezes! I can remember how I was astonished. I said to myself,—I said
to others,—“There comes into my mind such an indescribable, infinite,
all-absorbing, divine, heavenly pleasure, a sense of elevation and
expansion, and [I] have had nought to do with it. I perceive that
I am dealt with by superior powers.[234] This is a pleasure, a joy,
an existence which I have not procured myself. I speak as a witness
on the stand, and tell what I have perceived.” The morning and the
evening were sweet to me, and I led a life aloof from society of men.
I wondered if a mortal had ever known what I knew. I looked in books
for some recognition of a kindred experience, but, strange to say, I
found none. Indeed, I was slow to discover that other men had had this
experience, for it had been possible to read books and to associate
with men on other grounds. The maker of me was improving me. When I
detected this interference I was profoundly moved. For years I marched
as to a music in comparison with which the military music of the
streets is noise and discord. I was daily intoxicated, and yet no man
could call me intemperate. With all your science can you tell how it
is, and whence it is, that light comes into the soul?

Set out at 3 P. M. for Nine-Acre Corner Bridge _via_ Hubbard’s Bridge
and Conantum, returning _via_ Dashing Brook, rear of Baker’s, and
railroad at 6.30 P. M.

The song sparrow, the most familiar and New England bird, is heard
in fields and pastures, setting this midsummer day to music, as if
it were the music of a mossy rail or fence post; a little stream of
song, cooling, rippling through the noon,—the usually unseen songster
usually unheard like the cricket, it is so common,—like the poet’s
song, unheard by most men, whose ears are stopped with business, though
perchance it sang on the fence before the farmer’s house this morning
for an hour. There are little strains of poetry in our animals.

Berries are just beginning to ripen, and children are planning
expeditions after them. They are important as introducing children
to the fields and woods, and as wild fruits of which much account
is made. During the berry season the schools have a vacation, and
many little fingers are busy picking these small fruits. It is ever
a pastime, not a drudgery. I remember how glad I was when I was kept
from school a half a day to pick huckleberries on a neighboring hill
all by myself to make a pudding for the family dinner. Ah, they got
nothing but the pudding, but I got invaluable experience beside! A half
a day of liberty like that was like the promise of life eternal. It was
emancipation in New England. O, what a day was there, my countrymen!

I see the yellow butterflies now gathered in fleets in the road, and
on the flowers of the milkweed (_Asclepias pulchra_) by the roadside,
a really handsome flower; also the smaller butterfly, with reddish
wings, and a larger, black or steel-blue, with wings spotted red on
edge, and one of equal size, reddish copper-colored. Now you may see a
boy stealing after one, hat in hand. The earliest corn begins to tassel
out, and my neighbor has put his hand in the hill some days ago and
abstracted some new potatoes as big as nuts, then covered up again.
Now they will need—or will get—no more weeding. The lark sings in the
meadow; the very essence of the afternoon is in his strain. This is a
New England sound, but the cricket is heard under all sounds. Still
the cars come and go with the regularity of nature, of the sun and
moon. (If a hen puts her eggs elsewhere than in the barns,—in woods
or among rocks,—she is said to _steal_ her nest!) The twittering of
swallows is in the air, reminding me of water. The meadow-sweet is now
in bloom, and the yarrow prevails by all roadsides. I see the hardhack
too, homely but dear plant, just opening its red clustered flowers.
The small aster, too, now abounds (_Aster miser_),[235] and the tall
buttercup still. After wading through a swamp the other day with my
shoes in my hand, I wiped my feet with sassafras leaves, which reminded
me of some Arabian practices, the bruised leaves perfuming the air and
by their softness being adapted to this purpose. The tree-primrose,
or scabish, still is seen over the fence. The red-wings and crow
blackbirds are heard chattering on the trees, and the cow troopials are
accompanying the cows in the pastures for the sake of the insects they
scare up. Oftentimes the thoughtless sportsman has lodged his charge of
shot in the cow’s legs or body in his eagerness to obtain the birds.
St. John’s-wort, one of the first of yellow flowers, begins to shine
along the roadside. The mullein for some time past. I see a farmer
cradling his rye, John Potter. Fields are partly mown,—some English
grass on the higher parts of the meadow next to the road. The farmer’s
work comes not all at once. In haying time there is a cessation from
other labors to a considerable extent. Planting is done, and hoeing
mainly; only some turnip seed is to be scattered amid the corn. I hear
the kingbird twittering or chattering like a stout-chested swallow.
The prunella sends back a blue ray from under my feet as I walk; the
pale lobelia too. The plaintive, spring-restoring peep of a bluebird
is occasionally heard. I met loads of hay on the road, which the oxen
draw indifferently, swaggering in their gait, as if it were not fodder
for them. Methinks they should testify sometimes that they are working
for themselves. The whiteweed is turning black. Grapes are half grown
and lead the mind forward to autumn. It is an air this afternoon
that makes you indifferent to all things,—perfect summer, but with
a comfortable breeziness. You know not heat nor cold. What season of
the year is this? The balls of the button-bush are half formed, with
its fine, glossy, red-stemmed leaf atoning for its nakedness in the
spring. My eye ranges over green fields of oats, for which there is a
demand then somewhere. The wild rose peeps from amid the alders and
other shrubs by the roadside. The elder-blow fills the air with its
scent. The angelica, with its large umbels, is gone to seed. On it I
find one of those slow-moving green worms, with rings spotted black and
yellow, like an East Indian production. What if these grew as large
as elephants? The honest and truly fair is more modestly colored.
Notwithstanding the drifting clouds, you fear no rain to-day. As you
walk, you smell some sweet herbage, but detect not what it is. Hay is
sticking to the willows and the alders on the causeway, and the bridge
is sprinkled with it. The hemlock (_Cicuta Americana_) displays its
white umbels now. The yellow lilies reign in the river. The painted
tortoises drop off the willow stumps as you go over the bridge. The
river is now so low that you can see its bottom, shined on by the
sun, and travellers stop to look at fishes as they go over, leaning on
the rails. The pickerel-weed sends up its heavenly blue. The color of
the cows on Fair Haven Hill, how fair a contrast to the hillside! How
striking and wholesome their clean brick-red! When were they painted?
How carelessly the eye rests on them, or passes them by as things of
course! The tansy is budded. The devil’s-needles seem to rest in air
over the water. There is nothing New-English about them.

Now, at 4 P. M., I hear the pewee in the woods, and the cuckoo reminds
me of some silence among the birds I had not noticed. The vireo
(red-eyed?) sings like a robin at even, incessantly,—for I have now
turned into Conant’s woods. The oven-bird helps fill some pauses. The
poison sumach shows its green berries, now unconscious of guilt. The
heart-leaved loosestrife (_Lysimachia ciliata_) is seen in low open
woods. The breeze displays the white under sides of the oak leaves and
gives a fresh and flowing look to the woods. The river is a dark-blue
winding stripe amid the green of the meadow. What is the color of the
world? Green mixed with yellowish and reddish for hills and ripe grass,
and darker green for trees and forests; blue spotted with dark and
white for sky and clouds, and dark blue for water. Beyond the old house
I hear the squirrel chirp in the wall like a sparrow; so Nature merges
her creations into one. I am refreshed by the view of Nobscot and the
southwestern vales, from Conantum, seething with the blue element.
Here comes a small bird with a ricochet flight and a faint twittering
note like a messenger from Elysium. The rush sparrow jingles her small
change, pure silver, on the counter of the pasture. From far I see the
rye stacked up. A few dead trees impart the effect of wildness to the
landscape, though it is a feature rare in an old settled country.

Methinks this is the first of dog-days. The air in the distance has
a peculiar blue mistiness, or furnace-like look, though, as I have
said, it is not sultry yet. It is not the season for distant views.
Mountains are not _clearly_ blue now. The air is the opposite to what
it is in October and November. You are not inclined to travel. It is
a world of orchards and small-fruits now, and you can stay at home if
the well has cool water in it. The black thimble-berry is an honest,
homely berry, now drying up as usual. I used to have a pleasant time
stringing them on herd’s-grass stems, tracing the wall-sides for them.
It is pleasant to walk through these elevated fields, terraced upon
the side of the hill so that the eye of the walker looks off into the
blue cauldron of the air at his own level. Here the haymakers have just
gone to tea,—at 5 o’clock, the farmer’s hour, before the afternoon is
ended, while he still thinks much work may still be done before night.
He does not wait till he is strongly reminded of the night. In the
distance some burdened fields are black with haycocks. Some thoughtless
and cruel sportsman has killed twenty-two young partridges not much
bigger than robins, against the laws of Massachusetts and humanity. At
the Corner Bridge the white lilies are budded. Green apples are now so
large as to remind me of coddling and the autumn again.[236] The season
of fruits is arrived. The dog’s-bane has a pretty, delicate bell-like
flower. The Jersey tea abounds. I see the marks of the scythes in the
fields, showing the breadth of each swath the mowers cut. Cool springs
are now a desideratum. The geranium still hangs on. Even the creeping
vines love the brooks, and I see where one slender one has struggled
down and dangles into the current, which rocks it to and fro. Filberts
are formed, and you may get the berry stains out of your hands with
their husks, if you have any. Nightshade is in blossom. Came through
the pine plains behind James Baker’s, where late was open pasture,
now open pitch pine woods, only here and there the grass has given
place to a carpet of pine-needles. These are among our pleasantest
woods,—open, level, with blackberry vines interspersed and flowers,
as lady’s-slippers, earlier, and pinks on the outskirts. Each tree has
room enough. And now I hear the wood thrush from the shade, who loves
these pine woods as well as I. I pass by Walden’s scalloped shore.
The epilobium reflects a pink gleam up the vales and down the hills.
The chewink jingles on a bush’s top. Why will the Irishman drink of a
puddle by the railroad instead of digging a well? How shiftless! What
death in life! He cannot be said to live who does not get pure water.

The milkweeds, or silkweeds, are rich flowers, now in blossom. The
_Asclepias syriaca_, or common milkweed; its buds fly open at a touch.
But handsomer much is _Asclepias pulchra_, or water silkweed. The thin
green bark of this last, and indeed of the other, is so strong that a
man cannot break a small strip of it by pulling. It contains a mass
of fine silken fibres, arranged side by side like the strings of a
fiddle-bow, and may be bent short without weakening it.

       *       *       *       *       *

What more glorious condition of being can we imagine than from impure
to be becoming pure? It is almost desirable to be impure that we may
be the subject of this improvement. That I am innocent to myself!
That I love and reverence my life! That I am better fitted for a lofty
society to-day than I was yesterday! To make my life a sacrament! What
is nature without this lofty tumbling? May I treat myself with more
and more respect and tenderness. May I not forget that I am impure
and vicious. May I not cease to love purity. May I go to my slumbers
as expecting to arise to a new and more perfect day. May I so live
and refine my life as fitting myself for a society ever higher than I
actually enjoy. May I treat myself tenderly as I would treat the most
innocent child whom I love; may I treat children and my friends as my
newly discovered self. Let me forever go in search of myself; never for
a moment think that I have found myself; be as a stranger to myself,
never a familiar, seeking acquaintance still. May I be to myself as one
is to me whom I love, a dear and cherished object. What temple, what
fane, what sacred place can there be but the innermost part of my own
being? The possibility of my own improvement, that is to be cherished.
As I regard myself, so I am. O my dear friends, I have not forgotten
you. I will know you to-morrow. I associate you with my ideal self.
I had ceased to have faith in myself. I thought I was grown up and
become what I was intended to be, but it is earliest spring with me.
In relation to virtue and innocence the oldest man is in the beginning
spring and vernal season of life. It is the love of virtue makes us
young ever. That is the fountain of youth, the very aspiration after
the perfect. I love and worship myself with a love which absorbs my
love for the world. The lecturer suggested to me that I might become
better than I am. Was it not a good lecture, then? May I dream not that
I shunned vice; may I dream that I loved and practiced virtue.


_July 18._ It is a test question affecting the youth of a person,—Have
you knowledge of the morning? Do you sympathize with that season of
nature? Are you abroad early, brushing the dews aside? If the sun rises
on you slumbering, if you do not hear the morning cock-crow, if you
do not witness the blushes of Aurora, if you are not acquainted with
Venus as the morning star, what relation have you to wisdom and purity?
You have then forgotten your Creator in the days of your youth! Your
shutters were darkened till noon! You rose with a sick headache! In the
morning sing, as do the birds. What of those birds which should slumber
on their perches till the sun was an hour high? What kind of fowl would
they be and new kind of bats and owls,—hedge sparrows or larks? then
took a dish of tea or hot coffee before they began to sing?

I might have added to the list of July 16th the _Aralia hispida_,
bristling aralia; the heart-leaved loosestrife (_Lysimachia ciliata_);
also the upright loosestrife (_L. racemosa_), with a rounded terminal
raceme; the tufted vetch (_Vicia cracca_). Sweet-gale fruit now green.

I first heard the locust sing, so dry and piercing, by the side of the
pine woods in the heat of the day.


_July 19._ Here I am thirty-four years old,[237] and yet my life is
almost wholly unexpanded. How much is in the germ! There is such an
interval between my ideal and the actual in many instances that I may
say I am unborn. There is the instinct for society, but no society.
Life is not long enough for one success. Within another thirty-four
years that miracle can hardly take place. Methinks my seasons revolve
more slowly than those of nature; I am differently timed. I am
contented. This rapid revolution of nature, even of nature in me, why
should it hurry me? Let a man step to the music which he hears, however
measured. Is it important that I should mature as soon as an apple
tree? aye, as soon as an oak? May not my life in nature, in proportion
as it is supernatural, be only the spring and infantile portion of my
spirit’s life? Shall I turn my spring to summer? May I not sacrifice a
hasty and petty completeness here to entireness there? If my curve is
large, why bend it to a smaller circle? My spirit’s unfolding observes
not the pace of nature. The society which I was made for is not here.
Shall I, then, substitute for the anticipation of that this poor
reality? I would [rather] have the unmixed expectation of that than
this reality. If life is a waiting, so be it. I will not be shipwrecked
on a vain reality. What were any reality which I can substitute? Shall
I with pains erect a heaven of blue glass over myself, though when it
is done I shall be sure to gaze still on the true ethereal heaven far
above, as if the former were not,—that still distant sky o’er-arching
that blue expressive eye of heaven?[238] I am enamored of the blue-eyed
arch of heaven.

_I_ did not _make_ this demand for a more thorough sympathy. This is
not my idiosyncrasy or disease. He that made the demand will answer the
demand.

My blood flows as slowly as the waves of my native Musketaquid; yet
they reach the ocean sooner, perchance, than those of the Nashua.

Already the goldenrod is budded, but I can make no haste for that.


2 P. M.—The weather is warm and dry, and many leaves curl. There is
a threatening cloud in the southwest. The farmers dare not spread
their hay. It remains cocked in the fields. As you walk in the woods
nowadays, the flies striking against your hat sound like rain-drops.
The stump or root fences on the Corner road remind me of fossil remains
of mastodons, etc., exhumed and bleached in sun and rain. To-day I met
with the first orange flower of autumn. What means this doubly torrid,
this Bengal, tint? Yellow took sun enough, but this is the fruit of
a dog-day sun. The year has but just produced it. Here is the Canada
thistle in bloom, visited by butterflies and bees. The butterflies
have swarmed within these few days, especially about the milkweeds.
The swamp-pink still fills the air with its perfume in swamps and by
the causeways, though it is far gone. The wild rose still scatters its
petals over the leaves of neighboring plants. The wild morning-glory
or bindweed, with its delicate red and white blossoms. I remember it
ever as a goblet full of purest morning air and sparkling with dew,
showing the dew-point, winding round itself for want of other support.
It grows by the Hubbard Bridge causeway, near the angelica. The
cherry-birds are making their _seringo_ sound as they flit past. They
soon find out the locality of the cherry trees. And beyond the bridge
there is a goldenrod partially blossomed. Yesterday it was spring, and
to-morrow it will be autumn. Where is the summer then? First came the
St. John’s-wort and now the goldenrod to admonish us. I hear, too, a
cricket amid these stones under the blackberry vines, singing as in the
fall. Ripe blackberries are multiplying. I see the red-spotted berries
of the small Solomon’s-seal in my path. I notice, in the decayed end of
an oak post, that the silver grain is not decayed, but remains sound in
thin flakes, alternating with the decayed portions and giving the whole
a honeycombed look. Such an object supramundane, as even a swallow may
descend to light on, a dry mullein stalk for instance. I see that hens,
too, follow the cows feeding near the house, like the cow troopial,
and for the same object. They cannot so well scare up insects for
themselves. This is the dog the cowbird uses to start up its insect
game. I see yellow butterflies in pairs, pursuing each other a rod or
two into the air, and now, as he had bethought himself of the danger
of being devoured by a passing bird, he descends with a zigzag flight
to the earth, and the other follows. The black huckleberries are now so
thick among the green ones that they no longer incur suspicion of being
worm-eaten.

When formerly I was looking about to see what I could do for a living,
some sad experience in conforming to the wishes of friends being
fresh in my mind to tax my ingenuity, I thought often and seriously of
picking huckleberries; that surely I could do, and its small profits
might suffice, so little capital it required, so little distraction
from my wonted thoughts, I foolishly thought. While my acquaintances
went unhesitatingly into trade or the professions, I thought of this
occupation as most like theirs; ranging the hills all summer to pick
the berries which came in my way, which I might carelessly dispose of;
so to keep the flocks of King Admetus. My greatest skill has been to
want but little. I also dreamed that I might gather the wild herbs, or
carry evergreens to such villagers as loved to be reminded of the woods
and so find my living got. But I have since learned that trade curses
everything it handles; and though you _trade_ in messages from heaven,
the whole curse of trade attaches to the business.[239]

The wind rises more and more. The river and the pond are blacker
than the threatening cloud in the south. The thunder mutters in the
distance. The surface of the water is slightly rippled. Where the
pads grow is a light green border. The woods roar. Small white clouds
are hurrying across the dark-blue ground of the storm, which rests
on all the woods of the south horizon. But still no rain now for some
hours, as if the clouds were dissipated as fast as they reached this
atmosphere.

The barberry’s fruit hangs yellowish-green. What pretty covers the
thick bush makes, so large and wide and drooping! The _Fringilla
juncorum_ sings still, in spite of the coming tempest, which,
perchance, only threatens.

The woodchuck is a good native of the soil. The distant hillside and
the grain-fields and pastures are spotted yellow or white with his
recent burrows, and the small mounds remain for many years. Here where
the clover has lately been cut, see what a yellow mound is brought to
light!

  [Illustration]

Heavily hangs the common yellow lily (_Lilium Canadense_) in the
meadows. In the thick alder copses by the causeway-side I find
the _Lysimachia hybrida_. Here is the _Lactuca sanguinea_ with
its runcinate leaves, tall stem, and pale-crimson ray. And that
green-stemmed one higher than my head, resembling the last in its
leaves, is perchance the “tall lettuce,” or fireweed. Can that fine
white-flowered meadow-plant with the leaf be a thalictrum?


_July 20. Sunday morning._ A thunder-shower in the night. Thunder near
at hand, though louder, is a more trivial and earthly sound than at a
distance; likened to sounds of men. The clap which waked me last night
was as if some one was moving lumber in an upper apartment, some vast
hollow hall, tumbling it down and dragging it over the floor; and ever
and anon the lightning filled the damp air with light, like some vast
glow-worm in the fields of ether opening its wings.

The river, too, steadily yields its crop. In louring days it is
remarkable how many villagers resort to it. It is of more worth than
many gardens. I meet one, late in the afternoon, going to the river
with his basket on his arm and his pole in hand, not ambitious to catch
pickerel this time, but he thinks he may perhaps get a mess of small
fish. These [_sic_] kind of values are real and important, though but
little appreciated, and he is not a wise legislator who underrates them
and allows the bridges to be built low so as to prevent the passage of
small boats. The town is but little conscious how much interest it has
in the river, and might vote it away any day thoughtlessly. There is
always to be seen either some unshaven wading man, an old mower of the
river meadows, familiar with water, vibrating his long pole over the
lagoons of the off-shore pads, or else some solitary fisher, in a boat
behind the willows, like a mote in the sunbeams reflecting the light;
and who can tell how many a mess of river fish is daily cooked in the
town? They are an important article of food to many a poor family.

Some are poets, some are not,—as in relation to getting a living, so
to getting a wife. As their ideals of life vary, so do their ideals of
love.


4 P. M. Annursnack.—The under sides of the leaves, exposed by the
breeze, give a light bluish tinge to the woods as I look down on them.
Looking at the woods west of this hill, there is a grateful dark shade
under their eastern sides, where they meet the meadows, their cool
night side,—a triangular segment of night, to which the sun has set.
The mountains look like waves on a blue ocean tossed up by a stiff
gale. The _Rhexia Virginica_ is in bloom.


_July 21._ 8 A. M.—The forenoon is fuller of light. The butterflies on
the flowers look like other and frequently larger flowers themselves.
Now I yearn for one of those old, meandering, dry, uninhabited roads,
which lead away from towns, which lead us away from temptation, which
conduct to the outside of earth, over its uppermost crust; where you
may forget in what country you are travelling; where no farmer can
complain that you are treading down his grass, no gentleman who has
recently constructed a seat in the country that you are trespassing;
on which you can go off at half-cock and wave adieu to the village;
along which you may travel like a pilgrim, going nowhither; where
travellers are not too often to be met; where my spirit is free; where
the walls and fences are not cared for; where your head is more in
heaven than your feet are on earth; which have long reaches where you
can see the approaching traveller half a mile off and be prepared for
him; not so luxuriant a soil as to attract men; some root and stump
fences which do not need attention; where travellers have no occasion
to stop, but pass along and leave you to your thoughts; where it
makes no odds which way you face, whether you are going or coming,
whether it is morning or evening, mid-noon or midnight; where earth
is cheap enough by being public; where you can walk and think with
least obstruction, there being nothing to measure progress by; where
you can pace when your breast is full, and cherish your moodiness;
where you are not in false relations with men, are not dining nor
conversing with them; by which you may go to the uttermost parts of
the earth. It is wide enough, wide as the thoughts it allows to visit
you. Sometimes it is some particular half-dozen rods which I wish to
find myself pacing over, as where certain airs blow; then my life will
come to me, methinks; like a hunter I walk in wait for it. When I am
against this bare promontory of a huckleberry hill, then forsooth my
thoughts will expand. Is it some influence, as a vapor which exhales
from the ground, or something in the gales which blow there, or in
all things there brought together agreeably to my spirit? The walls
must not be too high, imprisoning me, but low, with numerous gaps. The
trees must not be too numerous, nor the hills too near, bounding the
view, nor the soil too rich, attracting the attention to the earth.
It must simply be the way and the life,—a way that was never known
to be repaired, nor to need repair, within the memory of the oldest
inhabitant. I cannot walk habitually in those ways that are liable to
be mended; for sure it was the devil only that wore them. Never by the
heel of thinkers (of thought) were they worn; the zephyrs could repair
that damage. The saunterer wears out no road, even though he travel on
it, and therefore should pay no highway, or rather _low_ way, tax. He
may be taxed to construct a higher way than men travel. A way which no
geese defile, nor hiss along it, but only sometimes their wild brethren
fly far overhead; which the kingbird and the swallow twitter over, and
the song sparrow sings on its rails; where the small red butterfly is
at home on the yarrow, and no boys threaten it with imprisoning hat.
There I can walk and stalk and pace and plod. Which nobody but Jonas
Potter travels beside me; where no cow but his is tempted to linger for
the herbage by its side; where the guide-board is fallen, and now the
hand points to heaven significantly,—to a Sudbury and Marlborough in
the skies. That’s a road I can travel, that the particular Sudbury I
am bound for, six miles an hour, or two, as you please; and few there
be that enter thereon. There I can walk, and recover the lost child
that I am without any ringing of a bell; where there was nothing ever
discovered to detain a traveller, but all went through about their
business; where I never passed the time of day with any,—indifferent
to me were the arbitrary divisions of time; where Tullus Hostilius
might have disappeared,—at any rate has never been seen. The road
to the Corner! the ninety and nine acres that you go through to get
there! I would rather see it again, though I saw it this morning,
than Gray’s churchyard. The road whence you may hear a stake-driver,
a whip-poor-will, a quail in a midsummer day, a—yes, a quail comes
nearest to the _gum-c_[240] bird heard there; where it would not be
sport for a sportsman to go. And the mayweed looks up in my face,—not
there; the pale lobelia, the Canada snapdragon, rather. A little
hardhack and meadowsweet peep over the fence,—nothing more serious to
obstruct the view,—and thimble-berries are the food of thought, before
the drought, along by the walls.[241]

It is they who go to Brighton and to market that wear out the roads,
and they should pay all the tax. The deliberate pace of a thinker never
made a road the worse for travelling on.

There I have freedom in my thought, and in my soul am free. Excepting
the omnipresent butcher with his calf-cart, followed by a distracted
and anxious cow.[242]

Be it known that in Concord, where the first forcible resistance to
British aggression was made in the year 1775, they chop up the young
calves and give them to the hens to make them lay, it being considered
the cheapest and most profitable food for them, and they sell the milk
to Boston.

On the promenade deck of the world, an outside passenger. The
inattentive, ever strange baker, whom no weather detains, that does not
bake his bread in this hemisphere,—and therefore it is dry before it
gets here. Ah! there is a road where you might advertise to fly, and
make no preparations till the time comes; where your wings will sprout
if anywhere, where your feet are not confined to earth. An airy head
makes light walking.

Where I am not confined and balked by the sight of distant farmhouses
which I have not gone past. In roads the obstructions are not under
my feet,—I care not for rough ground or wet even,—but they are in my
vision and in the thoughts or associations which I am compelled to
entertain. I must be fancy-free; I must feel that, wet or dry, high
or low, it is the genuine surface of the planet, and not a little
chip-dirt or a compost-heap, or made land or redeemed. Where I can
sit by the wall-side and not be peered at by any old ladies going
a-shopping, not have to bow to one whom I may have seen in my youth,—at
least, not more than once. I am engaged and cannot be polite. Did
you ever hear of such a thing as a man sitting in the road, and then
have four eyes levelled at you? Have we any more right sometimes to
look at one than to point a revolver at him; it might go off; and
so, perchance, we might _see_ him,—though there is not so much danger
of _that_,—which would be equally fatal, if it _should_ ever happen,
though perhaps it never has.

A thinker’s weight is in his thought, not in his tread; when he thinks
freely, his body weighs nothing. He cannot tread down your grass,
farmers.[243]

I thought to walk this forenoon instead of this afternoon, for I have
not been in the fields and woods much of late except when surveying,
but the least affair of that kind is as if you had [a] black veil
drawn over your face which shut out nature, as that eccentric and
melancholy minister whom I have heard of.[244] It may be the fairest
day in all the year and you shall not know it. One little chore to do,
one little commission to fulfill, one message to carry, would spoil
heaven itself. Talk about a lover being engaged! He is the only man in
all the world who is free. And all you get is your dollars. To go forth
before the heat is intolerable, and see what is the difference between
forenoon and afternoon. It seems there is a little more coolness in
the air; there is still some dew, even on this short grass in the
shade of the walls and woods; and a feeling of vigor the walker has.
There are few sounds but the slight twittering of swallows, and the
_springy_ note of the sparrow in the grass or trees, and a lark in the
meadow (now at 8 A. M.), and the cricket under all to ally the hour
to night. Day is, in fact, about as still as night. Draw the veil of
night over this landscape, and these sounds would not disturb nor be
inconsistent for their loudness with the night. It is a difference
of white and black. Nature is in a white sleep. It threatens to be a
hot day, and the haymakers are whetting their scythes in the fields,
where they have been out since 4 o’clock. When I have seen them in
the twilight commencing their labors, I have been impressed as if
it were last night. There is something ghastly about such very early
labor. I cannot detect the whole and characteristic difference between
this and afternoon, though it is positive and decided enough, as my
instincts know. By 2 o’clock it will be warmer and hazier, obscuring
the mountains, and the leaves will curl, and the dust will rise more
readily. Every herb is fresher now, has recovered from yesterday’s
drought. The cooler air of night still lingers in the fields, as by
night the warm air of day. The noon is perchance the time to stay in
the house.

There is no glory so bright but the veil of business can hide it
effectually. With most men life is postponed to some trivial business,
and so therefore is heaven. Men think foolishly they may abuse and
misspend life as they please and when they get to heaven turn over a
new leaf.

I see the track of a bare human foot in the dusty road, the toes
and muscles all faithfully imprinted. Such a sight is so rare that
it affects me with surprise, as the footprint on the shore of Juan
Fernandez did Crusoe. It is equally rare here. I am affected as
if some Indian or South-Sea-Islander had been along, some man who
had a foot. I am slow to be convinced that any of my neighbors—the
judge on the bench, the parson in the pulpit—might have made that or
something like it, however irregular. It is pleasant as it is to see
the tracks of cows and deer and birds. I am brought so much nearer to
the tracker—when again I think of the sole of my own foot—than when I
behold that of his shoe merely, or am introduced to him and converse
with him in the usual way. I am disposed to say to the judge whom I
meet, “Make tracks.”

Men are very generally spoiled by being so civil and well-disposed.
You can have no profitable conversation with them, they are so
conciliatory, determined to agree with you. They exhibit such
long-suffering and kindness in a short interview. I would meet with
some provoking strangeness, so that we may be guest and host and
refresh one another. It is possible for a man wholly to disappear and
be merged in his manners. The thousand and one gentlemen whom I meet,
I meet despairingly and but to part from them, for I am not cheered
by the hope of any rudeness from them. A cross man, a coarse man, an
eccentric man, a silent, a man who does not drill well,—of him there
is some hope. Your gentlemen, they are all alike. They utter their
opinions as if it was not a man that uttered them. It is “just as you
please;” they are indifferent to everything. They will talk with you
for nothing. The interesting man will rather avoid [you], and it is
a rare chance if you get so far as talk with him. The laborers whom
I know, the loafers, fishers, and hunters, I can spin yarns with
profitably, for it is hands off; they are they and I am I still;
they do not come to me and quarter themselves on me for a day or an
hour to be treated politely, they do not cast themselves on me for
entertainment, they do not approach me with a flag of truce. They
do not go out of themselves to meet me. I am never electrified by my
gentleman; he is not an electric eel, but one of the common kind that
slip through your hands, however hard you clutch them, and leave them
covered with slime. He is a man, every inch of him; is worth a groom.

To eat berries on the dry pastures of Conantum, as if they were the
food of thought, dry as itself! Berries are now thick enough to pick.

       *       *       *       *       *

9 A. M. On Conantum.—A quarter of a mile is distance enough to make the
atmosphere look blue now. This is never the case in spring or early
summer. It was fit that I should see an indigo-bird here, concerned
about its young, a perfect embodiment of the darkest blue that ever
fills the valleys at this season. The meadow-grass reflecting the light
has a bluish cast also.

Remember thy Creator in the days of thy youth; _i. e._, lay up a store
of natural influences. Sing while you may, before the evil days come.
He that hath ears, let him hear. See, hear, smell, taste, etc., while
these senses are fresh and pure.

There is always a kind of fine æolian harp music to be heard in the
air. I hear now, as it were, the mellow sound of distant horns in the
hollow mansions of the upper air, a sound to make all men divinely
insane that hear it, far away overhead, subsiding into my ear. To
ears that are expanded what a harp this world is! The occupied ear
thinks that beyond the cricket no sound can be heard, but there is an
immortal melody that may be heard morning, noon, and night, by ears
that can attend, and from time to time this man or that hears it,
having ears that were made for music. To hear this the hardhack and the
meadow-sweet _aspire_. They are thus beautifully painted, because they
are tinged in the lower stratum of that melody.

I eat these berries as simply and naturally as thoughts come to my
mind.

Never yet did I chance to sit in a house, except my own house in the
woods, and hear a wood thrush sing. Would it not be well to sit in such
a chamber within sound of the finest songster of the grove?

The quail, invisible, whistles, and who attends?

10 A. M.—The white lily has opened. How could it stand these heats?
It has pantingly opened, and now lies stretched out by its too long
stem on the surface of the shrunken river. The air grows more and more
blue, making pretty effects when one wood is seen from another through
a little interval. Some pigeons here are resting in the thickest of
the white pines during the heat of the day, migrating, no doubt. They
are unwilling to move for me. Flies buzz and rain about my hat, and the
dead twigs and leaves of the white pine, which the choppers have left
here, exhale a dry and almost sickening scent. A cuckoo chuckles, half
throttled, on a neighboring tree, and now, flying into the pine, scares
out a pigeon, which flies with its handsome tail spread, dashes this
side and that between the trees helplessly, like a ship carrying too
much sail in midst of a small creek, some great amiral; having no room
to manœuvre,—a fluttering flight.

The mountains can scarcely be seen for the blue haze,—only Wachusett
and the near ones. The thorny apple bush on Conantum has lately sent up
branches from its top, resolved to become a tree; and these spreading
(and bearing fruit), the whole has the form of a vast hour-glass. The
lower part being the most dense by far, you would say the sand had run
out.[245]

I now return through Conant’s leafy woods by the spring, whose floor is
sprinkled with sunlight,—low trees which yet effectually shade you.

The dusty mayweed now blooms by the roadside, one of the humblest
flowers. The rough hawkweed, too, by the damp roadside, resembling
in its flower the autumnal dandelion. That was probably the _Verbena
hastata_, or common blue vervain, which I found the other day by Walden
Pond.

The _Antirrhinum Canadense_, Canada snapdragon, in the Corner road; and
the ragged orchis on Conantum.

       *       *       *       *       *

8.30 P. M.—The streets of the village are much more interesting to
me at this hour of a summer evening than by day. Neighbors, and also
farmers, come a-shopping after their day’s haying, are chatting in
the streets, and I hear the sound of many musical instruments and of
singing from various houses. For a short hour or two the inhabitants
are sensibly employed. The evening is devoted to poetry, such as the
villagers can appreciate.

How rare to meet with a farmer who is a man of sentiment! Yet there
was one, Gen. Joshua Buttrick, who died the other day, who is said to
have lived in his sentiments. He used to say that the smell of burning
powder excited him.

It is said that Mirabeau took to highway robbery “to ascertain what
degree of resolution was necessary in order to place one’s self in
formal opposition to the most sacred laws of society.” He declared
that “a soldier who fights in the ranks does not require half so much
courage as a foot-pad.” “Honor and religion have never stood in the way
of a well-considered and a firm resolve.[246] Tell me, Du Saillant,
when you lead your regiment into the heat of battle, to conquer a
province to which he whom you call your master has no right whatever,
do you consider that you are performing a better action than mine, in
stopping your friend on the king’s highway, and demanding his purse?”

“I obey without reasoning,” replied the count.

“And I reason without obeying, when obedience appears to me to be
contrary to reason,” rejoined Mirabeau.[247]

This was good and manly, as the world goes; and yet it was desperate.
A saner man would have found opportunities enough to put himself in
formal opposition to the most sacred laws of society, and so test his
resolution, in the natural course of events, without violating the
laws of his own nature. It is not for a man to _put himself_ in such an
attitude to society, but to _maintain_ himself in whatever attitude he
finds himself through obedience to the laws of his being, which will
never be one of opposition to a just government.[248] Cut the leather
only where the shoe pinches. Let us not have a rabid virtue that will
be revenged on society,—that falls on it, not like the morning dew, but
like the fervid noonday sun, to wither it.


_July 22._ The season of morning fogs has arrived. I think it is
connected with dog-days. Perhaps it is owing to the greater contrast
between the night and the day, the nights being nearly as cold, while
the days are warmer? Before I rise from my couch, I see the ambrosial
fog stretched over the river, draping the trees. It is the summer’s
vapor bath. What purity in the color! It is almost musical; it is
positively fragrant. How faery-like it has visited our fields. I am
struck by its firm outlines, as distinct as a pillow’s edge, about the
height of my house. A great crescent over the course of the river from
southwest to northeast. Already, 5.30 A. M., some parts of the river
are bare. It goes off in a body down the river, before this air, and
does not rise into the heavens. It retreats, and I do not see how it
is dissipated. This slight, thin vapor which is left to curl over the
surface of the still, dark water, still as glass, seems not [to] be the
same thing,—of a different quality. I hear the cockerels crow through
it, and the rich crow of young roosters, that sound indicative of the
bravest, rudest health, hoarse without cold, hoarse with rude health.
That crow is all-nature-compelling; famine and pestilence flee before
it. These are our fairest days, which are born in a fog.

I saw the tall lettuce yesterday (_Lactuca elongata_), whose top or
main shoot had been broken off, and it had put up various stems, with
entire and lanceolate, not runcinate leaves as usual, thus making what
some botanists have called a variety, _β. linearis_. So I have met
with some geniuses who, having met with some such accident maiming
them, have been developed in some such _monstrous_ and partial, though
original, way. They were original in being less than themselves.

Yes, your leaf is peculiar, and some would make of you a distinct
variety, but to me you appear like the puny result of an accident and
misfortune, for you have lost your main shoot, and the leaves which
would have grown runcinate are small and lanceolate.

The last Sunday afternoon I smelled the clear pork frying for a
farmer’s supper thirty rods off (what a Sunday supper!), the windows
being open, and could imagine the _clear_ tea without milk which
usually accompanies it.

Now the cat-o’-nine-tails are seen in the impenetrable meadows, and
the tall green rush is perfecting its tufts. The spotted polygonum (_P.
Persicaria_) by the roadside.

I scare up a woodcock from some moist place at midday.

The pewee and kingbird are killing bees, perched on a post or a dead
twig.

I bathe me in the river. I lie down where it is shallow, amid the
weeds over its sandy bottom; but it seems shrunken and parched; I
find it difficult to get _wet_ through. I would fain be the channel
of a mountain brook. I bathe, and in a few hours I bathe again, not
remembering that I was wetted before. When I come to the river, I take
off my clothes and carry them over, then bathe and wash off the mud and
continue my walk. I would fain take rivers in my walks endwise.

There was a singular charm for me in those French names,—more than
in the things themselves. The names of Italian and Grecian cities,
villages, and natural features are not more poetic to me than the
names of those humble Canadian villages. To be told by a habitant,
when I asked the name of a village in sight, that is St. Féréol or St.
Anne’s! But I was quite taken off my feet when, running back to inquire
what river we were crossing, and thinking for a long time he said _la
rivière d’océan_, it flashed upon me at last that it was _La Rivière du
Chien_.[249]

       *       *       *       *       *

There was so much grace and sentiment and refinement in the names, how
could they be coarse who took them so often on their lips,—St. Anne’s,
St. Joseph’s; the holy Anne’s, the holy Joseph’s! Next to the Indian,
the French missionary and voyageur and Catholic habitant have named the
natural features of the land. The _prairie_, the _voyageur_! Or does
every man think his neighbor is the richer and more fortunate man, his
neighbor’s fields the richest?

It needed only a little outlandishness in the names, a little foreign
accent, a few more vowels in the words, to make me locate all my ideals
at once. How prepared we are for another world than this! We are no
sooner over the line of the States than we expect to see men leading
poetic lives,—nothing so natural, that is the presumption. The names
of the mountains, and the streams, and the villages reel with the
intoxication of poetry—Longueuil, Chambly, Barthillon (?), Montilly
(?).[250]

Where there were books only, to find realities. Of course we assign to
the place the idea which the written history or poem suggested. Quebec,
of course, is never seen for what it simply is to practical eyes, but
as the local habitation of those thoughts and visions which we have
derived from reading of Wolfe and Montcalm, Montgomery and Arnold. It
is hard to make me attend to the geology of Cape Diamond or the botany
of the Plains of Abraham.[251] How glad we are to find that there is
another race of men! for they may be more successful and fortunate than
we.

Canada is not a place for railroads to terminate in, or for criminals
to run to.[252]


_July 23. Wednesday._ I remember the last moon, shining through a
creamy atmosphere, with a tear in the eye of Nature and her tresses
dishevelled and drooping, sliding up the sky, the glistening air,
the leaves shining with dew, pulsating upward; an atmosphere unworn,
unprophaned by day. What self-healing in Nature!—swept by the dews.

For some weeks past the roadsides and the dry and trivial fields have
been covered with the field trefoil (_Trifolium arvense_), now in
bloom.

       *       *       *       *       *

8 A. M.—A comfortable breeze blowing. Methinks I can write better
in the afternoon, for the novelty of it, if I should go abroad this
morning. My genius makes distinctions which my understanding cannot,
and which my senses do not report. If I should reverse the usual,—go
forth and saunter in the fields all the forenoon, then sit down in my
chamber in the afternoon, which it is so unusual for me to do,—it would
be like a new season to me, and the novelty of it [would] inspire me.
The wind has fairly blown me outdoors; the elements were so lively and
active, and I so sympathized with them, that I could not sit while the
wind went by. And I am reminded that we should especially improve the
summer to live out-of-doors. When we may so easily, it behooves us to
break up this custom of sitting in the house, for it is but a custom,
and I am not sure that it has the sanction of common sense. A man no
sooner gets up than he sits down again. Fowls leave their perch in the
morning, and beasts their lairs, unless they are such as go abroad only
by night. The cockerel does not take up a new perch _in the barn_, and
he is the embodiment of health and common sense. Is the literary man to
live always or chiefly sitting in a chamber through which nature enters
by a window only? What is the use of the summer?

You must walk so gently as to hear the finest sounds, the faculties
being in repose. Your mind must not perspire. True, out of doors my
thought is commonly drowned, as it were, and shrunken, pressed down
by stupendous piles of light ethereal influences, for the pressure
of the atmosphere is still fifteen pounds to a square inch. I can do
little more than preserve the equilibrium and resist the pressure of
the atmosphere. I can only nod like the rye-heads in the breeze. I
expand more surely in my chamber, as far as expression goes, as if that
pressure were taken off; but here outdoors is the place to store up
influences.

The swallow’s twitter is the sound of the lapsing waves of the air, or
when they break and burst, as his wings represent the ripple. He has
more air in his bones than other birds; his feet are defective. The
fish of the air. His note is the voice of the air. As fishes may hear
the sound of waves lapsing on the surface and see the outlines of the
ripples, so we hear the note and see the flight of swallows.

The influences which make for one walk more than another, and one
day more than another, are much more ethereal than terrestrial. It is
the quality of the air much more than the quality of the ground that
concerns the walker,—cheers or depresses him. What he may find in the
air, not what he may find on the ground.

On such a road (the Corner) I walk securely, seeing far and wide on
both sides, as if I were flanked by light infantry on the hills, to
rout the provincials, as the British marched into Concord, while my
grenadier thoughts keep the main road. That is, my light-armed and
wandering thoughts scour the neighboring fields, and so I know if the
coast is clear. With what a breadth of van I advance! I am not bounded
by the walls. I think more than the road full. (Going southwesterly.)

While I am abroad, the ovipositors plant their seeds in me; I am
fly-blown with thought, and go home to hatch and brood over them.

I was too discursive and rambling in my thought for the chamber, and
must go where the wind blows on me walking.

A little brook crossing the road (the Corner road), a few inches’ depth
of transparent water rippling over yellow sand and pebbles, the pure
blood of nature. How miraculously crystal-like, how exquisite, fine,
and subtle, and liquid this element, which an imperceptible inclination
in the channel causes to flow thus surely and swiftly! How obedient
to its instinct, to the faintest suggestion of the hills! If inclined
but a hair’s breadth, it is in a torrent haste to obey. And all the
revolutions of the planet—nature is so exquisitely adjusted—and the
attraction of the stars do not disturb this equipoise, but the rills
still flow the same way, and the water levels are not disturbed.

We are not so much like debauchees as in the afternoon.

The mind is subject to moods, as the shadows of clouds pass over the
earth. Pay not too much heed to them. Let not the traveller stop for
them. They consist with the fairest weather. By the mood of my mind, I
suddenly felt dissuaded from continuing my walk, but I observed at the
same instant that the shadow of a cloud was passing over [the] spot
on which I stood, though it was of small extent, which, if it had no
connection with my mood, at any rate suggested how transient and little
to be regarded that mood was. I kept on, and in a moment the sun shone
on my walk within and without.

The button-bush in blossom. The tobacco-pipe in damp woods. Certain
localities only a few rods square in the fields and on the hills,
sometimes the other side of a wall, attract me as if they had been the
scene of pleasure in another state of existence.

But this habit of close observation,—in Humboldt, Darwin, and others.
Is it to be kept up long, this science? Do not tread on the heels of
your experience. Be impressed without making a minute of it. Poetry
puts an interval between the impression and the expression,—waits till
the seed germinates naturally.


_July 24._ 5 A. M.—The street and fields betray the drought and look
more parched than at noon; they look as I feel,—languid and thin and
feeling my nerves. The potatoes and the elms and the herbage by the
roadside, though there is a slight dew, seem to rise out of an arid and
thirsty soil into the atmosphere of a furnace slightly cooled down. The
leaves of the elms are yellow. Ah! now I see what the noon was and what
it may be again. The effects of drought are never more apparent than
at dawn. Nature is like a hen panting with open mouth, in the grass, as
the morning after a debauch.


_July 25. Friday._ Started for Clark’s Island at 7 A. M.

At 9 A. M. took the Hingham boat and was landed at Hull. There was
a pleasure party on board, apparently boys and girls belonging to
the South End, going to Hingham. There was a large proportion of
ill-dressed and ill-mannered boys of Irish extraction. A sad sight to
behold! Little boys of twelve years, prematurely old, sucking cigars! I
felt that if I were their mothers I should whip them and send them to
bed. Such children should be dealt with as for stealing or impurity.
The opening of this valve for the safety of the city! Oh, what a
wretched resource! What right have parents to beget, to bring up, and
attempt to _educate_ children in a city? I thought of infanticide among
the Orientals with complacency. I seemed to hear infant voices lisp,
“Give us a fair chance, parents.” There is no such squalidness in the
country. You would have said that they must all have come from the
house of correction and the farm-school, but such a company do the boys
in Boston streets make. The birds have more care for their young,—where
they place their nests. What are a city’s charities? She cannot be
charitable any more than the old philosopher could move the earth,
unless she has a resting-place without herself. A true culture is more
possible to the savage than to the boy of average intellect, born of
average parents, in a great city. I believe that they perish miserably.
How can they be kept clean, physically or morally? It is folly to
attempt to educate children within a city; the first step must be to
remove them out of it. It seemed a groping and helpless philanthropy
that I heard of.

I heard a boy telling the story of Nix’s Mate to some girls, as we
passed that spot, how “he said, ‘If I am guilty, this island will
remain; but if I am innocent, it will be washed away,’ and now it
is all washed away.”[253] This was a simple and strong expression of
feeling suitable to the occasion, by which he committed the evidence
of his innocence to the dumb isle, such as the boy could appreciate, a
proper sailor’s legend; and I was reminded that it is the illiterate
and unimaginative class that seizes on and transmits the legends in
which the more cultivated delight. No fastidious poet dwelling in
Boston had tampered with it,—no narrow poet, but broad mankind, sailors
from all ports sailing by. They, sitting on the deck, were the literary
academy that sat upon its periods.

On the beach at Hull, and afterwards all along the shore to Plymouth,
I saw the datura, the variety (red-stemmed), methinks, which some call
_Tatula_ instead of _Stramonium_. I felt as if I was on the highway of
the world, at sight of this cosmopolite and veteran traveller. It told
of commerce and sailors’ yarns without end. It grows luxuriantly in
sand and gravel. This Captain Cook among plants, this Norseman or sea
pirate, viking or king of the bays, the beaches. It is not an innocent
plant; it suggests commerce, with its attendant vices.[254]

Saw a public house where I landed at Hull, made like some barns which
I have seen, of boards with a cleat nailed over the cracks, without
clapboards or paint, evidently very simple and cheap, yet neat and
convenient as well as airy. It interested me, as the New House at Long
Island did not, as it brought the luxury and comfort of the seashore
within reach of the less wealthy. It was such an exhibition of good
sense as I was not prepared for and do not remember to have seen
before. Ascended to the top of the hill, where is the old French fort,
with the well said to be ninety feet deep, now covered.[255] I saw some
horses standing on the very top of the ramparts, the highest part of
Hull, where there was hardly room to turn round, for the sake of the
breeze.[256] It was excessively warm, and their instincts, or their
experience perchance, guided them as surely to the summit as it did
me. Here is the telegraph, nine miles from Boston, whose State-House
was just visible,—movable signs on a pole with holes in them for the
passage of the wind. A man about the telegraph station thought it the
highest point in the harbor; said they could tell the kind of vessel
thirty miles off, the number at masthead ten or twelve miles, name on
hull six or seven miles. They can see furthest in the fall. There is
a mist summer and winter, when the contrast between the temperature
of the sea and the air is greatest. I did not see why this hill should
not be fortified as well as George’s Island, it being higher and also
commanding the main channel. However, an enemy could go by all the
forts in the dark, as Wolfe did at Quebec.[257] They are bungling
contrivances.

  [Illustrations]

Here the bank is rapidly washing away. On every side, in Boston Harbor,
the evidences of the wasting away of the islands are so obvious and
striking that they appear to be wasting faster than they are. You
will sometimes see a springing hill, showing by the interrupted arch
of its surface against the sky how much space [it] must have occupied
where there is now water, as at Point Allerton,—what botanists call
premorse. Hull looks as if it had been two islands, since connected
by a beach. I was struck by the gracefully curving and fantastic shore
of a small island (Hog Island) inside of Hull, where everything seemed
to be gently lapsing into futurity, as if the inhabitants should bear
a ripple for device on their coat-of-arms, a wave passing over them,
with the datura growing on their shores. The wrecks of isles fancifully
arranged into a new shore. To see the sea nibbling thus voraciously
at the continents![258] A man at the telegraph told me of a white oak
pole a foot and a half in diameter, forty feet high, and four feet or
more in the rock at Minot’s Ledge, with four guys, which stood only one
year. Stone piled up cob-fashion near same place stood eight years.

Hull pretty good land, but bare of trees—only a few cherries for the
most part—and mostly uncultivated, being owned by few. I heard the
voices of men shouting aboard a vessel half a mile from the shore,
which sounded as if they were in a barn in the country, they being
between the sails. It was not a sea sound. It was a purely rural
sound.[259]

Man needs to know but little more than a lobster in order to catch him
in his traps. Here were many lobster traps on the shore. The beds of
dry seaweed or eel-grass on the beach remind me of narrow shavings. On
the farther hill in Hull, I saw a field full of Canada thistles close
up to the fences on all sides, while beyond them there was none. So
much for these fields having been subjected to different culture. So a
different culture in the case of men brings in different weeds. As are
the virtues, so are the vices. Weeds come in with the seeds, though
perhaps much more in the manure. Each kind of culture will introduce
its own weeds.

I am bothered to walk with those who wish to keep step with me. It is
not necessary to keep step with your companion, as some endeavor to do.

They told me at Hull that they burned the _stem_ of the kelp chiefly
for potash. Chemistry is not a splitting hairs when you have got half
a dozen raw Irishmen in the laboratory.

As I walked on the beach (Nantasket), panting with thirst, a man
pointed to a white spot on the side of a distant hill (Strawberry
Hill he called it) which rose from the gravelly beach, and said that
there was a pure and cold and unfailing spring; and I could not help
admiring that in this town of Hull, of which I had heard, but now for
the first time saw, a single spring should appear to me and should be
of so much value. I found Hull indeed, but there was also a spring on
that parched, unsheltered shore; the spring, though I did not visit it,
made the deepest impression on my mind. Hull, the place of the spring
and of the well. This is what the traveller would remember. All that he
remembered of Rome was a spring on the Capitoline Hill![260]

       *       *       *       *       *

It is the most perfect seashore I have seen.[261] The rockweed falls
over you like the _tresses_ of mermaids, and you see the propriety of
that epithet. You cannot swim among these weeds and pull yourself up by
them without thinking of mermen and mermaids.

The barnacles on the rocks, which make a whitish strip a few feet in
width just above the weeds, remind me of some vegetable growth which I
have seen,—surrounded by a circle of calyx-like or petal-like shells
like some buds or seed-vessels. They, too, clinging to the rocks
like the weeds; lying along the seams of the rock like buttons on a
waistcoat.

I saw in Cohasset, separated from the sea only by a narrow beach, a
very large and handsome but shallow lake, of at least four hundred
acres, with five rocky islets in it; which the sea had tossed over the
beach in the great storm in the spring, and, after the alewives had
passed into it, stopped up its outlet; and now the alewives were dying
by thousands, and the inhabitants apprehended a pestilence as the water
evaporated. The water was very foul.[262]

The rockweed is considered the best for manure. I saw them drying
the Irish moss in quantities at Jerusalem Village in Cohasset. It is
said to be used for sizing calico. Finding myself on the edge of a
thunder-storm, I stopped a few moments at the Rock House in Cohasset,
close to the shore. There was scarcely rain enough to wet one, and no
wind. I was therefore surprised to hear afterward, through a young man
who had just returned from Liverpool, that there was a severe squall at
quarantine ground, only seven or eight miles northwest of me, such as
he had not experienced for three years, which sunk several boats and
caused some vessels to drag their anchors and come near going ashore;
proving that the gust which struck the water there must have been of
very limited breadth, for I was or might have been overlooking the spot
and felt no wind. This rocky shore is called Pleasant Cove on large
maps; on the map of Cohasset alone, the name seems to be confined to
the cove where I first saw the wreck of the St. John alone.[263]

Brush Island, opposite this, with a hut on it, not permanently
inhabited. It takes but little soil to tempt men to inhabit such
places. I saw here the American holly (_Ilex opaca_), which is not
found further north than Massachusetts, but south and west. The yellow
gerardia in the woods.


_July 26._ At Cohasset.—Called on Captain Snow, who remembered hearing
fishermen say that they “fitted out at Thoreau’s;” remembered him. He
had commanded a packet between Boston or New York and England. Spoke
of the wave which he sometimes met on the Atlantic coming against the
wind, and which indicated that the wind was blowing from an opposite
quarter at a distance, the undulation travelling faster than the wind.
They see Cape Cod loom here. Thought the Bay between here and Cape
Ann thirty fathoms deep; between here and Cape Cod, sixty or seventy
fathoms. The “Annual of Scientific Discovery” for 1851 says, quoting a
Mr. A. G. Findley, “Waves travel very great distances, and are often
raised by distant hurricanes, having been felt simultaneously at St.
Helena and Ascension, though 600 miles apart, and it is probable that
ground swells often originate at the Cape of Good Hope, 3000 miles
distant.” Sailors tell of tide-rips. Some are thought to be occasioned
by earthquakes.

The ocean at Cohasset did not look as if any were ever shipwrecked in
it. Not a vestige of a wreck left. It was not grand and sublime now,
but beautiful. The water held in the little hollows of the rocks, on
the receding of the tide, is so crystal-pure that you cannot believe it
salt, but wish to drink it.[264]

The architect of a Minot Rock lighthouse might profitably spend a day
studying the worn rocks of Cohasset shore, and learn the power of the
waves, see what kind of sand the sea is using to grind them down.

A fine delicate seaweed, which some properly enough call sea-green. Saw
here the staghorn, or velvet, sumach (_Rhus typhina_), so called from
form of young branches, a size larger than the _Rhus glabra_ common
with us. The _Plantago maritima_, or sea plantain, properly named.
I guessed its name before I knew what it was called by botanists.
The American sea-rocket (_Bunias edentula_) I suppose it was that I
saw,—the succulent plant with much cut leaves and small pinkish (?)
flowers.


_July 27. Sunday._ Walked from Cohasset to Duxbury and sailed thence to
Clark’s Island.

Visited the large tupelo tree (_Nyssa multiflora_) in Scituate, whose
rounded and open top, like some umbelliferous plant’s, I could see from
Mr. Sewal’s, the tree which George Emerson went twenty-five miles to
see, called sometimes snag-tree and swamp hornbeam, also pepperidge
and gum-tree. Hard to split. We have it in Concord. Cardinal-flower in
bloom. Scituate meeting-houses on very high ground; the principal one
a landmark for sailors. Saw the buckthorn, which is naturalized. One of
Marshfield meeting-houses on the height of land on my road. The country
generally descends westerly toward the sources of Taunton River.

After taking the road by Webster’s beyond South Marshfield, I walked
a long way at noon, hot and thirsty, before I could find a suitable
place to sit and eat my dinner,—a place where the shade and the sward
pleased me. At length I was obliged to put up with a small shade close
to the ruts, where the only stream I had seen for some time crossed
the road. Here, also, numerous robins came to cool and wash themselves
and to drink. They stood in the water up to their bellies, from time
to time wetting their wings and tails and also ducking their heads and
sprinkling the water over themselves; then they sat on a fence near by
to dry. Then a goldfinch came and did the same, accompanied by the less
brilliant female. These birds evidently enjoyed their bath greatly, and
it seemed indispensable to them.

A neighbor of Webster’s told me that he had hard on to sixteen hundred
acres and was still buying more,—a farm and factory within the year;
cultivated a hundred and fifty acres. I saw twelve acres of potatoes
together, the same of rye and wheat, and more methinks of buckwheat.
Fifteen or sixteen men, Irish mostly, at ten dollars a month, doing the
work of fifty, with a Yankee overseer, long a resident of Marshfield,
named Wright. Would eat only the produce of his farm during the few
weeks he was at home,—brown bread and butter and milk,—and sent out for
a pig’s cheek to eat with his greens. Ate only what grew on his farm,
but drank more than ran on his farm.

Took refuge from the rain at a Mr. Stetson’s in Duxbury.

I forgot to say that I passed the Winslow House, now belonging to
Webster. This land was granted to the family in 1637.

Sailed with tavern-keeper Winsor, who was going out mackereling. Seven
men, stripping up their clothes, each bearing an armful of wood and
one some new potatoes, walked to the boats, then shoved them out a
dozen rods over the mud, then rowed half a mile to the schooner of
forty-three tons. They expected [to] be gone about a week, and to begin
to fish perhaps the next morning. Fresh mackerel which they carried
to Boston. Had four dories, and commonly fished from them. Else they
fished on the starboard side aft, where their lines hung ready with the
old baits on, two to a man. I had the experience of going on a mackerel
cruise.

They went aboard their schooner in a leisurely way this Sunday evening,
with a fair but very slight wind, the sun now setting clear and shining
on the vessel after several thunder-showers. I was struck by the small
quantity of supplies which they appeared to take. We climbed aboard,
and there we were in a mackerel schooner. The baits were not dry on
the hooks. Winsor cast overboard the foul juice of mackerels mixed
with rain-water which remained in his trough. There was the mill in
which to grind up the mackerel for bait, and the trough to hold it, and
the long-handled dipper to cast it overboard with; and already in the
harbor we saw the surface rippled with schools of small mackerel. They
proceeded leisurely to weigh anchor, and then to raise their two sails.
There was one passenger, going for health or amusement, who had been
to California. I had the experience of going a-mackereling, though I
was landed on an island before we got out of the harbor. They expected
to commence fishing the next morning. It had been a very warm day with
frequent thunder-showers. I had walked from Cohasset to Duxbury, and
had walked about the latter town to find a passage to Clark’s Island,
about three miles distant, but no boat could stir, they said, at that
state of the tide.[265] The tide was down, and boats were left high
and dry. At length I was directed to Winsor’s tavern, where perchance I
might find some mackerel-fishers, who were going to sail that night to
be ready for fishing in the morning, and, as they would pass near the
island, they would take me. I found it so. Winsor himself was going.
I told him he was the very man for me; but I must wait an hour. So
I ate supper with them. Then one after another of his crew was seen
straggling to the shore, for the most part in high boots,—some made of
india-rubber,—some with their pants stripped up. There were seven for
this schooner, beside a passenger and myself. The leisurely manner in
which they proceeded struck me. I had taken off my shoes and stockings
and prepared to wade. Each of the seven took an armful of pine wood and
walked with it to the two boats, which lay at high-water mark in the
mud; then they resolved that each should bring one more armful and that
would be enough. They had already got a barrel of water and had some
more in the schooner, also a bucket of new potatoes. Then, dividing
into two parties, we pulled and shoved the boats a dozen rods over
the mud and water till they floated, then rowed half a mile or more
over the shallow water to the little schooner and climbed aboard. Many
seals had their heads out. We gathered about the helmsman and talked
about the compass, which was affected by the iron in the vessel, etc.,
etc.[266]

       *       *       *       *       *

  [Illustration]

Clark’s Island, Sunday night.—On Friday night December 8th, O. S.,
the Pilgrims, exploring in the shallop, landed on Clark’s Island (so
called from the master’s mate of the May-Flower), where they spent
three nights and kept their first Sabbath. On Monday, or the 11th,
O. S., they landed on the Rock. This island contains about eighty-six
acres and was once covered with red cedars which were sold at Boston
for gate-posts. I saw a few left, one, two feet in diameter at the
ground, which was probably standing when the Pilgrims came. Ed. Watson,
who could remember them nearly fifty years, had observed but little
change in them. Hutchinson calls this one of the best islands in
Massachusetts Bay. The town kept it at first as a sacred place, but
finally sold it in 1690 to Samuel Lucas, Elkanah Watson, and George
Morton. Saw a stag’s-horn sumach five or six inches in diameter and
eighteen feet high. Here was the marsh goldenrod (_Solidago lævigata_)
not yet in blossom; a small bluish flower in the marshes, which they
called rosemary; a kind of chenopodium which appeared distinct from the
common; and a short oval-leaved, set-looking plant which I suppose is
_Glaux maritima_, sea milkwort, or saltwort. Skates’ eggs, called in
England skate-barrows from their form, on the sand. The old cedars were
flat-topped, spreading, the stratum of the wind drawn out.


_July 28. Monday morning._ Sailed [to] the Gurnet, which runs down
seven miles into the bay from Marshfield. Heard the _peep_ of the
_beach-bird_. Saw some ring-necks in company with peeps. They told of
eagles which had flown low over the island lately. Went by Saquish.
Gathered a basketful of Irish moss bleached on the beach. Saw a
field full of pink-blossomed potatoes at the lighthouse, remarkably
luxuriant and full of blossoms; also some French barley. Old fort and
barracks by lighthouse. Visited lobster houses or huts there, where
they use lobsters to catch bait for lobsters. Saw on the shanties signs
from ships, as “Justice Story” and “Margueritta.” To obtain bait is
sometimes the main thing. Samphire (_Salicornia_), which they pickle;
also a kind of prickly samphire, which I suppose is saltwort, or
_Salsola Caroliniana_. Well at Clark’s Island twenty-seven and three
quarters feet deep. Cut the rockweed on the rocks at low tide once in
two or three years. Very valuable; more than they have time to save.

Uncle Ned told of a man who went off fishing from back of Wellfleet in
calm weather, and with great difficulty got ashore through the surf.
Those in the other boat, who had landed, were unwilling to take the
responsibility of telling them when to pull for shore; the one who had
the helm was inexperienced. They were swamped at once. So treacherous
is this shore. Before the wind comes, perchance, the sea may run so as
to upset and drown you on the shore. At first they thought to pull for
Provincetown, but night was coming on, and that was distant many a long
mile. Their case was a desperate one. When they came near the shore
and saw the terrific breakers that intervened, they were deterred. They
were thoroughly frightened.[267]

  [Illustrations]

Were troubled with skunks on this island; they must have come over on
the ice. Foxes they had seen; had killed one woodchuck; even a large
_mud turtle_, which they _conjectured some bird must have dropped_.
Muskrats they had seen, and killed two raccoons once. I went a-clamming
just before night. This the clam-digger, borrowed of Uncle Bill
(Watson) in his schooner home. The clams nearly a foot deep, but I
broke many in digging. Said not to be good now, but we found them good
eaten fresh. No sale for them now; fetch twenty-five cents a bucket in
their season. Barry caught squids as bait for bass. We found many dead
clams,—their shells full of sand,—called sand clams.[268] By a new clam
law any one can dig clams here. Brown’s Island, so called, a shoal off
the Gurnet, thought to have been an isle once, a dangerous place. Saw
here fences, the posts set in cross sleepers, made to be removed in
winter.

The finest music in a menagerie, its wildest strains, have something
in them akin to the cries of the tigers and leopards heard in their
native forests. Those strains are not unfitted to the assemblage
of wild beasts. They express to my ear what the tiger’s stripes and
the leopard’s spots express to my eye; and they appear to grin with
satisfaction at the sound. That nature has any place at all for music
is very good.


_July 29. Tuesday._ A northeast wind with rain, but the sea is the
wilder for it. I heard the surf roar on the Gurnet [in] the night,
which, as Uncle Ned and Freeman said, showed that the wind would work
round east and we should have rainy weather. It was the wave reaching
the shore before the wind. The ocean was heaped up somewhere to the
eastward, and this roar was occasioned by its effort to preserve its
equilibrium. The rut of the sea.[269] In the afternoon I sailed to
Plymouth, three miles, notwithstanding the drizzling rain, or “drisk,”
as Uncle Ned called it. We passed round the head of Plymouth beach,
which is three miles long. I did not know till afterward that I had
landed where the Pilgrims did and passed over the Rock on Hedge’s
Wharf. Returning, we had more wind and tacking to do.

Saw many seals together on a flat. Singular that these strange animals
should be so abundant here and yet the man who lives a few miles inland
never hear of them. To him there is no report of the sea, though he may
read the Plymouth paper. The Boston papers do not tell us that they
have seals in the Harbor. The inhabitants of Plymouth do not seem to
be aware of it. I always think of seals in connection with Esquimaux or
some other outlandish people, not in connection with those who live on
the shores of Boston and Plymouth harbors. Yet from their windows they
may daily see a family [of] seals, the real _Phoca vitulina_, collected
on a flat or sporting in the waves. I saw one dashing through the waves
just ahead of our boat, going to join his companions on the bar,—as
strange to me as the merman. No less wild, essentially, than when the
Pilgrims came is this harbor.

  [Illustrations]

It being low tide, we landed on a flat which makes out from Clark’s
Island, to while away the time, not being able to get quite up yet.
I found numerous _large_ holes of the sea clam in this sand (no small
clams), and dug them out easily and rapidly with my hands. Could have
got a large quantity in a short time; but here they do not eat them;
think they will make you sick. They were not so deep in the sand, not
more than five or six inches. I saw where one had squirted full ten
feet before the wind, as appeared by the marks of the drops on the
sand. Some small ones I found not more than a quarter of an inch in
length. Le Baron brought me [a] round clam or quahog alive, with a
very thick shell, and not so nearly an isosceles triangle as the sea
clam,—more like this: with a protuberance on the back. The sea clam: A
small, narrow clam which they called the bank clam; also crab-cases,
handsomely spotted. Small crab always in a cockle-shell if not in a
case of his own. A cockle as large as my fist. Mussels, small ones,
empty shells; an extensive bank where they had died. Occasionally a
large deep-sea mussel, which some kelp had brought up. We caught some
sand eels seven or eight inches long,—_Ammodytes tobianus_, according
to Storer, and not the _A. lancea_ of Yarrell, though the size of the
last comes nearer. They were in the shallow pools left on the sand (the
flat was here pure naked yellowish sand), and quickly buried themselves
when pursued. They are used as bait for bass. Found some sand-circles
or sandpaper, like top of a stone jug cut off, with a large nose; said
to be made by the foot of the large cockle, which has some glutinous
matter on it.[270] A circle of sand about as thick as thick pasteboard.
It reminded me of the caddis-worm cases, skate-barrows, etc., etc. I
observed the shell of a sea clam one valve of which was filled exactly
even full with sand,—evenly as if it had been heaped and then scraped
off, as when men measure by the peck. This was a fresher one of the
myriad sand-clams, and it suggested to me how the stone clams which I
had seen on Cape Cod might have been formed. Perchance a clamshell was
the mould in which they were cast, and a slight hardening of the level
surface, before the whole is turned to stone, causes them to split in
two. The sand was full of stone clams in the mould.[271] I saw the kelp
attached to stones half as big as my head, which it had transported. I
do not think I ever saw the kelp _in situ_. Also attached to a deep-sea
mussel. The kelp is like a broad ruffled belt. The middle portion is
thicker and flat, the edges for two or three inches thinner and fuller,
so that it is fulled or ruffled, as if the edges had been hammered. The
extremity is generally worn and ragged from the lashing of the waves.
It is the prototype of a fringed belt. Uncle Ned said that the cows
ate it.[272] We saw in the shallow water a long, _round_ green grass,
six or eight feet long, clogging up the channel. Round grass, I think
they called it. We caught a lobster, as you might catch a mud turtle in
the country, in the shallow water, pushing him ashore with the paddle,
taking hold of his tail to avoid being bitten. They are obliged to put
wooden plugs or wedges beside their claws to prevent their tearing each
other to pieces. All weeds are bleached on the beach.

This sailing on salt water was something new to me. The boat is such
a living creature, even this clumsy one sailing within five points of
the wind. The sailboat is an admirable invention, by which you compel
the wind to transport you even against itself. It is easier to guide
than a horse; the slightest pressure on the tiller suffices. I think
the inventor must have been greatly surprised, as well as delighted,
at the success of his experiment. It is so contrary to expectation, as
if the elements were disposed to favor you. This deep, unfordable sea!
but this wind ever blowing over it to transport you! At 10 P. M. it was
perfectly fair and bright starlight.


_July 30. Wednesday._ The house here stands within a grove of
balm-of-Gileads, horse-chestnuts, cherries, apples, and plums, etc.
Uncle Bill, who lives in his schooner,—not turned up Numidian fashion,
but anchored in the mud,—whom I meant to call on yesterday morn, lo!
had run over to “the Pines” last evening, fearing an easterly storm.
He outrode the great gale in the spring alone in the harbor, dashing
about. He goes after rockweed, lighters vessels, and saves wrecks.
Now I see him lying in the mud over at the Pines in the horizon, which
place he cannot leave if he will, till flood-tide; but he will not, it
seems. This waiting for the tide is a singular feature in the life by
the shore. In leaving your boat to-day you must always have reference
to what you are going to do the next day. A frequent answer is, “Well,
you can’t start for two hours yet.” It is something new to a landsman,
and at first he is not disposed to wait.[273] I saw some heaps of
shells left by the Indians near the northern end of the island. They
were a rod in diameter and a foot or more high in the middle, and
covered with a shorter and greener grass than the surrounding field.
Found one imperfect arrowhead.

At 10 A. M. sailed to Webster’s, past Powder Point in Duxbury. We
could see his land from the island. I was steersman and learned the
meaning of some nautical phrases,—“luff,” to keep the boat close to
the wind till the sails begin to flap; “bear away,” to put the sail
more at right angles with the wind; a “close haul,” when the sails are
brought and belayed nearly or quite in a line with the vessel. On the
marshes we saw patches of a “_black_ grass.” A large field of wheat at
Webster’s,—half a dozen acres at least,—many apple trees, three-thorned
acacias, tulip-trees; cranberry experiment; seaweed spread under his
tomatoes. Wild geese with black and gray heads and necks, not so heavy
and clumsy as the tame Bremens. Large, noisy Hongkong geese. Handsome
calves. Three thousand (?) acres of marsh.

Talked with Webster’s nearest neighbor, Captain Hewit, whose small
farm he surrounds and endeavors in vain to buy. A fair specimen of
a retired Yankee sea-captain turned farmer. Proud of the quantity of
carrots he had raised on a small patch. It was better husbandry than
Webster’s. He told a story of his buying a cargo for his owners at
St. Petersburg just as peace was declared in the last war. These men
are not so remarkable for anything as the quality of hardness. The
very fixedness and rigidity of their jaws and necks express a sort of
adamantine hardness. This is what they have learned by contact with the
elements. The man who does not grow rigid with years and experience!
Where is he? What avails it to grow hard merely? The harder you are,
the more brittle really, like the bones of the old. How much rarer and
better to grow mellow! A sort of stone fruit the man bears commonly; a
bare stone it is, without any sweet and mellow pericarp around it. It
is like the peach which has dried to the stone as the season advanced;
it is dwindled to a dry stone with its almond. In presence of one of
these hard men I think: “How brittle! How easily you would crack! What
a poor and lame conclusion!” I can think of nothing but a stone in his
head. Truly genial men do not grow [hard]. It is the result of despair,
this attitude of resistance. They behave like men already driven to the
wall. Notwithstanding that the speaker trembles with infirmity while
he speaks,—his hand on the spade,—it is such a trembling as betrays a
stony nature. His hand trembles so that the full glass of cider which
he prizes to a drop will have lost half its contents before it reaches
his lips, as if a tempest had arisen in it. Hopelessly hard. But there
is another view of him. He is somebody. He has an opinion to express,
if you will wait to hear him. A certain manliness and refreshing
resistance is in him. He generally makes Webster a call, but Webster
does not want to see you more than twenty minutes. It does not take him
long to say all he has got to say. He had not seen him to speak to him
since he had come home this time. He had sent him over a couple of fine
cod the night before. Such a man as Hewit sees not finely but coarsely.

The eagle given by Lawrence on the hill in the buckwheat field.


_July 31. Thursday._ Those same round shells (_Scutella parma_
(_placenta_) ?) on the sand as at Cape Cod, the live ones reddish, the
dead white. Went off early this morning with Uncle Ned to catch bass
with the small fish I had found on the sand the night before. Two of
his neighbor Albert Watson’s boys were there,—not James, the oldest,
but Edward, the sailor, and Mortimer (or Mort),—in their boat. They
killed some striped bass (_Labrax lineatus_) with paddles in a shallow
creek in the sand, and caught some lobsters. I remarked that the
seashore was singularly clean, for, notwithstanding the spattering of
the water and mud and squirting of the clams and wading to and fro the
boat, my best black pants retained no stains nor dirt, as they would
acquire from walking in the country. I caught a bass with a young—haik?
(perchance), trailing thirty feet behind while Uncle Ned paddled.
They catch them in England with a “trawl-net.” Sometimes they weigh
seventy-five pounds here.

At 11 A. M. set sail to Plymouth. We went somewhat out of a direct
course, to take advantage of the tide, which was coming in. Saw the
site of the first house, which was burned, on Leyden Street. Walked
up the same, parallel with the Town Brook. Hill from which Billington
Sea was discovered hardly a mile from the shore, on Watson’s grounds.
Watson’s Hill, where treaty was made across brook south of Burying
Hill. At Watson’s,[274] the oriental plane, _Abies Douglasii_,
ginkgo tree (_q. v._ on Common), a foreign hardhack, English oak
(dark-colored, small leaf), Spanish chestnut, Chinese arbor-vitæ,
Norway spruce (like our fir balsam), a new kind of fir balsam. Black
eagle one of the good cherries. Fuchsias in hothouse. Earth bank
covered with cement.

Mr. Thomas Russell, who cannot be seventy, at whose house on Leyden
Street I took tea and spent the evening, told me that he remembered to
have seen Ebenezer Cobb, a native of Plymouth, who died in Kingston in
1801, aged one hundred and seven, who remembered to have had personal
knowledge of Peregrine White, saw him an old man riding on horseback
(he lived to be eighty-three). White was born at Cape Cod Harbor before
the Pilgrims got to Plymouth. C. Sturgis’s mother told me the same
of herself at the same time. She remembered Cobb sitting in an arm
chair like the one she herself occupied, with his silver locks falling
about his shoulders, twirling one thumb over the other. Lyell in first
volume, “Second Visit,” page 97, published 1849,[275] says: “Colonel
Perkins, of Boston, ... informed me, in 1846, that there was but one
link wanting in the chain of personal communication between him and
Peregrine White, the first white child born in Massachusetts, a few
days after the Pilgrims landed. White lived to an advanced age, and was
known to a man of the name of Cobb, whom Colonel Perkins visited, in
1807, with some friends who yet survive. Cobb died in 1808, the year
after Colonel Perkins saw him.”

  [Illustration: _Town Brook, Plymouth_]

Russell told me that he once bought some _primitive_ woodland in
Plymouth which was sold at auction—the biggest pitch pines two feet
diameter—for _eight shillings_ an acre. If he had bought enough, it
would have been a fortune. There is still forest in this town which
the axe has not touched, says George Bradford. According to Thatcher’s
History of Plymouth, there were 11,662 acres of woodland in 1831, or
twenty square miles. Pilgrims first saw Billington Sea about January
1st; visited it January 8th. The oldest stone in the Plymouth Burying
Ground, 1681. (Coles (?) Hill, where those who died the first winter
were buried, is said to have been levelled and sown to conceal loss
from Indians.) Oldest on our hill, 1677. In Mrs. Plympton’s garden on
Leyden Street, running down to Town Brook, saw an abundance of pears,
gathered excellent June-eating apples, saw a large lilac about eight
inches diameter. Methinks a soil may improve when at length it has
shaded itself with vegetation.

William S. Russell, the registrar at the court-house, showed the oldest
town records, for all are preserved. On first page a plan of Leyden
Street dated December, 1620, with names of settlers. They have a great
many folios. The writing plain. Saw the charter granted by the Plymouth
Company to the Pilgrims, signed by Warwick, dated 1629, and the box in
which it was brought over, with the seal.

  [Illustrations]

Pilgrim Hall. They used to crack off pieces of the Forefathers’ Rock
for visitors with a cold chisel, till the town forbade it. The stone
remaining at wharf is about seven feet square. Saw two old armchairs
that came over in the Mayflower, the large picture by Sargent,
Standish’s sword, gun-barrel with which Philip was killed, mug and
pocket-book of Clark the mate, iron pot of Standish, old pipe-tongs.
Indian relics: a flayer; a pot or mortar of a kind of fire-proof stone,
very hard, only seven or eight inches long. A commission from Cromwell
to Winslow (?), his signature torn off. They talk of a monument on the
Rock. The Burying Hill 165 feet high. Manomet 394 feet high by State
map. Saw more pears at Washburn’s garden. No graves of Pilgrims.

Seaweed generally used along shore. Saw the _Prinos glabra_, ink-berry,
at Billington Sea. Sandy plain with oaks of various kinds cut in less
than twenty years. No communication with Sandwich. Plymouth end of
world; fifty miles thither by railroad. Old Colony road poor property.
Nothing saves Plymouth but the Rock. Fern-leaved beach.

Saw the king crab (_Limulus polyphemus_), horseshoe and saucepan
fish, at the Island, covered with sea-green and buried in the sand for
concealment.

In Plymouth the _Convolvulus arvensis_, small bindweed.