Chapter XII JANUARY-APRIL, 1851.

_Jan. 2._ Saw at Clinton last night a room at the gingham-mills which
covers one and seven-eighths acres and contains 578 looms, not to speak
of spindles, both throttle and mule. The rooms all together cover three
acres. They were using between three and four hundred horse-power, and
kept an engine of two hundred horse-power, with a wheel twenty-three
feet in diameter and a band ready to supply deficiencies, which have
not often occurred. Some portion of the machinery—I think it was where
the cotton was broken up, lightened up, and mixed before being matted
together—revolved eighteen hundred times in a minute.

I first saw the pattern room where patterns are made by a hand loom.
There were two styles of warps ready for the woof or filling. The
operator must count the threads of the woof, which in the mill is done
by the machinery. It was the ancient art of weaving, the shuttle flying
back and forth, putting in the filling. As long as the warp is the
same, it is but one “style,” so called.

The cotton should possess a long staple and be clean and free from
seed. The Sea Island cotton has a long staple and is valuable for
thread. Many bales are thoroughly mixed to make the goods of one
quality. The cotton is then torn to pieces and thoroughly lightened
up by cylinders armed with hooks and by fans; then spread, a certain
weight on a square yard, and matted together, and torn up and matted
together again two or three times over; then the matted cotton fed
to a cylindrical card, a very thin web of it, which is gathered into
a copper trough, making six (the six-card machines) flat, rope-like
bands, which are united into one at the railway head and drawn. And
this operation of uniting and drawing or stretching goes on from one
machine to another until the thread is spun, which is then dyed (calico
is printed after being woven),—having been wound off on to reels and so
made into skeins,—dyed and dried by steam; then, by machinery, wound
on to spools for the warp and the woof. From a great many spools the
warp is drawn off over cylinders and different-colored threads properly
mixed and arranged. Then the ends of the warp are drawn through the
harness of the loom by hand. The operator knows the succession of
red, blue, green, etc., threads, having the numbers given her, and
draws them through the harness accordingly, keeping count. Then the
woof is put in, or it is _woven_!! Then the inequalities or nubs are
picked off by girls. If _they_ discover any imperfection, they tag it,
and if necessary the wages of the weaver are reduced. Now, I think,
it is passed over a red-hot iron cylinder, and the fuzz singed off,
then washed with wheels with cold water; then the water forced out by
centrifugal force within horizontal wheels. Then it is starched, the
ends stitched together by machinery; then stretched smooth, dried, and
ironed by machinery; then measured, folded, and packed.

This the agent, Forbes, says is the best gingham-mill in this country.
The goods are better than the imported. The English have even stolen
their name Lancaster Mills, calling them “Lancasterian.”

The machinery is some of it peculiar, part of the throttle spindles (?)
for instance.

The coach-lace-mill, only place in this country where it is made by
machinery; made of thread of different materials, as cotton, worsted,
linen, as well as colors, the raised figure produced by needles
inserted woof fashion. Well worth examining further. Also pantaloon
stuffs made in same mill and dyed after being woven, the woolen not
taking the same dye with the cotton; hence a slight parti-colored
appearance. These goods are sheared, _i. e._ a part of the nap taken
off, making them smoother. Pressed between pasteboards.

The Brussels carpets made at the carpet-factory said to be the best in
the world. Made like coach lace, only wider.

Erastus (?) Bigelow inventor of what is new in the above machinery;
and, with his brother and another, owner of the carpet-factory.

I am struck by the fact that no work has been shirked when a piece of
cloth is produced. Every thread has been counted in the finest web;
it has not been matted together. The operator has succeeded only by
patience, perseverance, and fidelity.

       *       *       *       *       *

The direction in which a railroad runs, though intersecting another at
right angles, may cause that one will be blocked up with snow and the
other be comparatively open even for great distances, depending on the
direction of prevailing winds and valleys. There are the Fitchburg and
Nashua & Worcester.


_Jan. 4._ The longest silence is the most pertinent question most
pertinently put. Emphatically silent. The most important question,
whose answers concern us more than any, are never put in any other way.

It is difficult for two strangers, mutually well disposed, so truly
to bear themselves toward each other that a feeling of falseness and
hollowness shall not soon spring up between them. The least anxiety
to behave truly vitiates the relation. I think of those to whom I am
at the moment truly related, with a joy never expressed and never to
be expressed, before I fall asleep at night, though I am hardly on
speaking terms with them these years. When I think of it, I am truly
related to them.


_Jan. 5._ The catkins of the alders are now frozen stiff!!

Almost all that my neighbors call good I believe in my soul to be
bad. If I repent of anything, it is of my good behavior. What demon
possessed me that I behaved so well? You may say the wisest thing you
can, old man,—you who have lived seventy years, not without honor of
a kind,—I hear an irresistible voice, the voice of my destiny, which
invites me away from all that.[111]


_Jan. 7._ The snow is sixteen inches deep at least, but [it] is a mild
and genial afternoon, as if it were the beginning of a January thaw.
Take away the snow and it would not be winter but like many days in
the fall. The birds acknowledge the difference in the air; the jays are
more noisy, and the chickadees are oftener heard.

Many herbs are not crushed by the snow.

I do not remember to have seen fleas except when the weather was mild
and the snow damp.

I must live above all in the present.

       *       *       *       *       *

Science does not embody all that men know, only what is for men of
science. The woodman tells me how he caught trout in a box trap, how
he made his trough for maple sap of pine logs, and the spouts of sumach
or white ash, which have a large pith. He can relate his facts to human
life.

The knowledge of an unlearned man is living and luxuriant like a
forest, but covered with mosses and lichens and for the most part
inaccessible and going to waste; the knowledge of the man of science is
like timber collected in yards for public works, which still supports
a green sprout here and there, but even this is liable to dry rot.

I felt my spirits rise when I had got off the road into the open
fields, and the sky had a new appearance. I stepped along more
buoyantly. There was a warm sunset over the wooded valleys, a yellowish
tinge on the pines. Reddish dun-colored clouds like dusky flames stood
over it. And then streaks of blue sky were seen here and there. The
life, the joy, that is in blue sky after a storm! There is no account
of the blue sky in history. Before I walked in the ruts of travel; now
I adventured. This evening a fog comes up from the south.

If I have any conversation with a scamp in my walk, my afternoon is
wont to be spoiled.

The squirrels and apparently the rabbits have got all the frozen apples
in the hollow behind Miles’s. The rabbits appear to have devoured what
the squirrels dropped and left. I see the tracks of both leading from
the woods on all sides to the apple trees.


_Jan. 8._ The smilax (green-briar) berries still hang on like small
grapes. The thorn of this vine is very perfect, like a straight dagger.

The light of the setting sun falling on the snow-banks to-day made them
glow almost yellow.

The hills seen from Fair Haven Pond make a wholly new landscape;
covered with snow and yellowish green or brown pines and shrub
oaks, they look higher and more massive. Their white mantle relates
them to the clouds in the horizon and to the sky. Perchance what is
light-colored looks loftier than what is dark.

You might say of a very old and withered man or woman that they hung
on like a shrub oak leaf, almost to a second spring. There was still a
little life in the heel of the leaf-stalk.


_Jan. 10._ The snow shows how much of the mountains in the horizon are
covered with forest. I can also see plainer as I stand on a hill what
proportion of the township is in forest.

Got some excellent frozen-thawed apples off of Annursnack, soft and
luscious as a custard and free from worms and rot. Saw a partridge
budding, but they did not appear to have pecked the apples.

There was a remarkable sunset; a mother-of-pearl sky seen over the
Price farm; some small clouds, as well as the edges of large ones, most
brilliantly painted with mother-of-pearl tints through and through. I
never saw the like before. Who can foretell the sunset,—what it will
be?

The near and bare hills covered with snow look like mountains, but the
mountains in the horizon do not look higher than hills.

I frequently see a hole in the snow where a partridge has squatted, the
mark or form of her tail very distinct.

The chivalric and heroic spirit, which once belonged to the chevalier
or rider only, seems now to reside in the walker. To represent the
chivalric spirit we have no longer a knight, but a walker, errant.[112]
I speak not of pedestrianism, or of walking a thousand miles in a
thousand successive hours.

The Adam who daily takes a turn in his garden.

Methinks I would not accept of the gift of life, if I were required
to spend as large a portion of it sitting foot up or with my legs
crossed, as the shoemakers and tailors do. As well be tied neck and
heels together and cast into the sea. Making acquaintance with my
extremities.

I have met with but one or two persons in the course of my life who
understood the art of taking walks daily,—not [to] exercise the legs
or body merely, nor barely to recruit the spirits, but positively
to exercise both body and spirit, and to succeed to the highest and
worthiest ends by the abandonment of all specific ends,—who had a
genius, so to speak, for sauntering. And this word “saunter,” by the
way, is happily derived “from idle people who roved about the country
[in the Middle Ages][113] and asked charity under pretence of going
_à la Sainte Terre_,” to the Holy Land, till, perchance, the children
exclaimed, “There goes a _Sainte-Terrer_,” a Holy-Lander. They who
never go to the Holy Land in their walks, as they pretend, are indeed
mere idlers and vagabonds.[114]

       *       *       *       *       *

     [Four pages missing.]

[Perhaps I am more] than usually jealous of my freedom. I feel that my
connections with and obligations to society are at present very slight
and transient. Those slight labors which afford me a livelihood, and
by which I am serviceable to my contemporaries, are as yet a pleasure
to me, and I am not often reminded that they are a necessity. So far
I am successful, and only he is successful in his business who makes
that pursuit which affords him the highest pleasure sustain him. But I
foresee that if my wants should be much increased the labor required to
supply them would become a drudgery. If I should sell both my forenoons
and afternoons to society, neglecting my peculiar calling, there would
be nothing left worth living for. I trust that I shall never thus sell
my birthright for a mess of pottage.[115]

F. Andrew Michaux says that “the species of large trees are much more
numerous in North America than in Europe: in the United States there
are more than one hundred and forty species that exceed thirty feet in
height; in France there are but thirty that attain this size, of which
eighteen enter into the composition of the forests, and seven only are
employed in building.”[116]

The perfect resemblance of the chestnut, beech, and hornbeam in Europe
and the United States rendered a separate figure unnecessary.

He says the white oak “is the only oak on which a few of the dried
leaves persist till the circulation is renewed in the spring.”

Had often heard his father say that “the fruit of the common European
walnut, in its natural state, is harder than that of the American
species just mentioned [the pacane-nut hickory][117] and inferior to it
in size and quality.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The arts teach us a thousand lessons. Not a yard of cloth can be woven
without the most thorough fidelity in the weaver. The ship must be made
_absolutely_ tight before it is launched.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is an important difference between two characters that the one is
satisfied with a happy but level success but the other as constantly
elevates his aim. Though my life is low, if my spirit looks upward
habitually at an elevated angle, it is as it were redeemed. When the
desire to be better than we are is really sincere we are instantly
elevated, and so far better already.

I lose my friends, of course, as much by my own ill treatment and ill
valuing of them, prophaning of them, cheapening of them, as by their
cheapening of themselves, till at last, when I am prepared to [do] them
justice, I am permitted to deal only with the memories of themselves,
their ideals still surviving in me, no longer with their actual selves.
We exclude ourselves, as the child said of the stream in which he
bathed head or foot. (_Vide_ Confucius.)

       *       *       *       *       *

It is something to know when you are addressed by Divinity and not by
a common traveller. I went down cellar just now to get an armful of
wood and, passing the brick piers with my wood and candle, I heard,
methought, a commonplace suggestion, but when, as it were by accident,
I reverently attended to the hint, I found that it was the voice
of a god who had followed me down cellar to speak to me. How many
communications may we not lose through inattention!

I would fain keep a journal which should contain those thoughts and
impressions which I am most liable to forget that I have had; which
would have in one sense the greatest remoteness, in another, the
greatest nearness to me.

’T is healthy to be sick sometimes.

       *       *       *       *       *

I do not know but the reason why I love some Latin verses more than
whole English poems is simply in the elegant terseness and conciseness
of the language, an advantage which the individual appears to have
shared with his nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

When we can no longer ramble in the fields of nature, we ramble in the
fields of thought and literature. The old become readers. Our heads
retain their strength when our legs have become weak.

English literature from the days of the minstrels to the Lake Poets,
Chaucer and Spenser and Shakspeare and Milton included, breathes no
quite fresh and, in this sense, wild strain. It is an essentially tame
and civilized literature, reflecting Greece and Rome. Her wilderness
is a greenwood, her wild man a Robin Hood. There is plenty of genial
love of nature in her poets, but [not so much of nature herself.] Her
chronicles inform us when her wild animals, but not when the wild man
in her, became extinct.[118] There was need of America. I cannot think
of any poetry which adequately expresses this yearning for the Wild,
the _wilde_.[119]

       *       *       *       *       *

Ovid says:—

     Nilus in extremum fugit perterritus orbem,
     Occuluitque caput, quod adhuc latet.

     (Nilus, terrified, fled to the extremity of the globe,
     And hid his head, which is still concealed.)

And we moderns must repeat, “_Quod adhuc latet_.” Phaëton’s epitaph:—

     Hic situs est Phaëton, currûs auriga paterni;
     Quem si non tenuit, magnis tamen excidit ausis.

His sister Lampetie _subitâ radice retenta est_. All the sisters were
changed to trees while they were in vain beseeching their mother not to
break their branches. _Cortex in verba novissima venit._

His brother Cycnus, lamenting the death of Phaëton killed by Jove’s
lightning, and the metamorphosis of his sisters, was changed into a
swan,—

             nec se coeloque, Jovique
     Credit, ut injustè missi memor ignis ab illo.

                   (Nor trusts himself to the heavens
     Nor to Jove, as if remembering the fire unjustly sent by him),

_i. e._ against Phaëton. (Reason why the swan does not fly.)

     ... precibusque minas regaliter addit.
     ([Jove] royally adds threats to prayers.)

Callisto _miles erat Phoebes_, _i. e._ a huntress.

           ... (neque enim coelestia tingi
     Ora decet lachrymis).

     (For it is not becoming that the faces of the celestials be tinged
     with tears,—keep a stiff upper lip.)

How much more fertile a nature has Grecian mythology its root in
than English literature! The nature which inspired mythology still
flourishes. Mythology is the crop which the Old World bore before its
soil was exhausted. The West is preparing to add its fables to those of
the East.[120] A more fertile nature than the Mississippi Valley.

None of your four-hour nights for me. The wise man will take a fool’s
allowance. The corn would not come to much if the nights were but four
hours long.

The soil in which those fables grew is deep and inexhaustible.

       *       *       *       *       *

Lead cast by the Balearian sling:—

             Volat illud, et incandescit eundo;
       Et, quos non habuit, sub nubibus invenit ignes.
           (That flies and grows hot with going,
     And fires which it had not finds amid the clouds.)

       *       *       *       *       *

I went some months ago to see a panorama of the Rhine. It was like
a dream of the Middle Ages. I floated down its historic stream in
something more than imagination, under bridges built by the Romans and
repaired by later heroes, past cities and castles whose very names were
music to me,—made my ears tingle,—and each of which was the subject
of a legend. There seemed to come up from its waters and its vine-clad
hills and valleys a hushed music as of crusaders departing for the Holy
Land. There were Ehrenbreitstein and Rolandseck and Coblentz, which I
knew only in history. I floated along through the moonlight of history
under the spell of enchantment. It was as if I remembered a glorious
dream,—as if I had been transported to a heroic age and breathed an
atmosphere of chivalry. Those times appeared far more poetic and heroic
than these.

Soon after I went to see the panorama of the Mississippi, and as
I fitly worked my way upward in the light of to-day, and saw the
steamboats wooding up, and looked up the Ohio and the Missouri, and
saw its unpeopled cliffs, and counted the rising cities,[121] and saw
the Indians removing west across the stream, and heard the legends
of Dubuque and of Wenona’s Cliff,—still thinking more of the future
than of the past or present,—I saw that this was a Rhine stream of a
different kind.[122]

       *       *       *       *       *

The Old World, with its vast deserts and its arid and elevated steppes
and table-lands, contrasted with the New World with its humid and
fertile valleys and savannas and prairies and its boundless primitive
forests, is like the exhausted Indian corn lands contrasted with the
peat meadows. America requires some of the sand of the Old World to be
carted on to her rich but as yet unassimilated meadows.

       *       *       *       *       *

Guyot says, “The Baltic Sea has a depth of only 120 feet between
the coasts of Germany and those of Sweden” (page 82). “The Adriatic,
between Venice and Trieste, has a depth of only 130 feet.” “Between
France and England, the greatest depth does not exceed 300 feet.” The
most extensive forest, “the most gigantic wilderness,” on the earth
is in the basin of the Amazon, and extends almost unbroken more than
fifteen hundred miles. South America the kingdom of palms; nowhere
a greater number of species. “This is a sign of the preponderating
development of leaves over every other part of the vegetable growth; of
that expansion of foliage, of that _leafiness_, peculiar to warm and
moist climates. America has no plants with slender, shrunken leaves,
like those of Africa and New Holland. The Ericas, or heather, so
common, so varied, so characteristic of the flora of the Cape of Good
Hope, is a form unknown to the New World. There is nothing resembling
those Metrosideri of Africa, those dry Myrtles (Eucalyptus) and
willow-leaved acacias, whose flowers shine with the liveliest colors,
but their narrow foliage, turned edgewise to the vertical sun, casts no
shadow.”[123]

       *       *       *       *       *

The white man derives his nourishment from the earth,—from the roots
and grains, the potato and wheat and corn and rice and sugar, which
often grow in fertile and pestilential river bottoms fatal to the life
of the cultivator. The Indian has but a slender hold on the earth. He
derives his nourishment in great part but indirectly from her, through
the animals he hunts.[124]

       *       *       *       *       *

“Compared with the Old World, the New World is the humid side of our
planet, the _oceanic, vegetative_ world, the passive element awaiting
the excitement of a livelier impulse from without.”[125]

       *       *       *       *       *

“For the American, this task is to work the virgin soil.”

“Agriculture here already assumes proportions unknown everywhere
else.”[126]


_Feb. 9._ The last half of January was warm and thawy. The swift
streams were open, and the muskrats were seen swimming and diving
and bringing up clams, leaving their shells on the ice. We had now
forgotten summer and autumn, but had already begun to anticipate
spring. Fishermen improved the warmer weather to fish for pickerel
through the ice. Before it was only the autumn landscape with a thin
layer of snow upon it; we saw the withered flowers through it; but
now we do not think of autumn when we look on this snow. That earth
is effectually buried. It is midwinter. Within a few days the cold
has set in stronger than ever, though the days are much longer now.
Now I travel across the fields on the crust which has frozen since the
January thaw, and I can cross the river in most places. It is easier to
get about the country than at any other season,—easier than in summer,
because the rivers and meadows are frozen and there is no high grass or
other crops to be avoided; easier than in December before the crust was
frozen.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sir John Mandeville says, “In fro what partie of the earth that men
dwell, outher aboven or benethen, it seemeth always to hem that dwellen
there, that they gon more right than any other folk.” Again, “And yee
shulle undirstonde, that of all theise contrees, and of all theise
yles, and of all the dyverse folk, that I have spoken of before,
and of dyverse laws and of dyverse beleeves that thei have, yit is
there non of hem alle, but that thei have sum resoun within hem and
understondinge, but gif it be the fewere.”

I have heard that there is a Society for the Diffusion of Useful
Knowledge. It is said that knowledge is power and the like. Methinks
there is equal need of a Society for the Diffusion of Useful Ignorance,
for what is most of our boasted so-called knowledge but a conceit
that we know something, which robs us of the advantages of our actual
ignorance.[127]

       *       *       *       *       *

For a man’s ignorance sometimes is not only useful but beautiful, while
his knowledge is oftentimes worse than useless, beside being ugly.[128]
In reference to important things, whose knowledge amounts to more
than a consciousness of his ignorance? Yet what more refreshing and
inspiring knowledge than this?

How often are we wise as serpents without being harmless as doves!

Donne says, “Who are a little wise the best fools be.” Cudworth says,
“We have all of us by nature μάντευμά τε (as both Plato and Aristotle
call it), a certain divination, presage and parturient vaticination
in our minds, of some higher good and perfection than either power
or knowledge.” Aristotle himself declares, that there is λόγον τι
κρεῖττον, which is λόγον ἀρχή,—(something better than reason and
knowledge, which is the principle and original of all). Lavater says,
“Who finds the clearest not clear, thinks the darkest not obscure.”

       *       *       *       *       *

My desire for knowledge is intermittent; but my desire to commune with
the spirit of the universe, to be intoxicated even with the fumes, call
it, of that divine nectar, to bear my head through atmospheres and over
heights unknown to my feet, is perennial and constant.[129]

  [Illustration: _Midwinter_]

It is remarkable how few events or crises there are in our minds’
histories, how little _exercised_ we have been in our minds, how few
experiences we have had.[130]

     [Four pages missing.]

The story of Romulus and Remus being suckled by a wolf is not a mere
fable; the founders of every state which has risen to eminence have
drawn their nourishment and vigor from a similar source. It is because
the children of the empire were not suckled by wolves that they were
conquered and displaced by the children of the northern forests who
were.[131]

America is the she wolf to-day, and the children of exhausted Europe
exposed on her uninhabited and savage shores are the Romulus and Remus
who, having derived new life and vigor from her breast, have founded a
new Rome in the West.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is remarkable how few passages, comparatively speaking, there are in
the best literature of the day which betray any intimacy with Nature.

It is apparent enough to me that only one or two of my townsmen or
acquaintances—not more than one in many thousand men, indeed—feel or at
least obey any strong attraction drawing them toward the forest or to
Nature, but all, almost without exception, gravitate exclusively toward
men, or society.[132] The young men of Concord and in other towns
do not walk in the woods, but congregate in shops and offices. They
suck one another. Their strongest attraction is toward the mill-dam.
A thousand assemble about the fountain in the public square,—the town
pump,—be it full or dry, clear or turbid, every morning, but not one
in a thousand is in the meanwhile drinking at that fountain’s head. It
is hard for the young, aye, and the old, man in the outskirts to keep
away from the mill-dam a whole day; but he will find some excuse, as an
ounce of cloves that might be wanted, or a _New England Farmer_ still
in the office, to tackle up the horse, or even go afoot, but he will go
at some rate. This is not bad comparatively; this is because he cannot
do better. In spite of his hoeing and chopping, he is unexpressed and
undeveloped.

I do not know where to find in any literature, whether ancient or
modern, any adequate account of that Nature with which I am acquainted.
Mythology comes nearest to it of any.[133]

The actual life of men is not without a dramatic interest at least to
the thinker. It is not always and everywhere prosaic. Seventy thousand
pilgrims proceed annually to Mecca from the various nations of Islam.
But this is not so significant as the far simpler and more unpretending
pilgrimage to the shrines of some obscure individual, which yet makes
no bustle in the world.

I believe that Adam in paradise was not so favorably situated on
the whole as is the backwoodsman in America.[134] You all know how
miserably the former turned out,—or was turned out,—but there is some
consolation at least in the fact that it yet remains to be seen how the
western Adam in the wilderness will turn out.

     In Adam’s fall
     We sinned all.
     In the new Adam’s rise
     We shall all reach the skies.

An infusion of hemlock in our tea, if we must drink tea,—not the
poison hemlock, but the hemlock spruce, I mean,[135]—or perchance the
Arbor-Vitæ, the tree of life,—is what we want.


_Feb. 12. Wednesday._ A beautiful day, with but little snow or ice on
the ground. Though the air is sharp, as the earth is half bare the hens
have strayed to some distance from the barns. The hens, standing around
their lord and pluming themselves and still fretting a little, strive
to fetch the year about.

A thaw has nearly washed away the snow and raised the river and the
brooks and flooded the meadows, covering the old ice, which is still
fast to the bottom.

I find that it is an excellent walk for variety and novelty and
wildness, to keep round the edge of the meadow,—the ice not being
strong enough to bear and transparent as water,—on the bare ground
or snow, just between the highest water mark and the present water
line,—a narrow, meandering walk, rich in unexpected views and objects.
The line of rubbish which marks the higher tides—withered flags and
reeds and twigs and cranberries—is to my eyes a very agreeable and
significant line, which Nature traces along the edge of the meadows. It
is a strongly marked, enduring natural line, which in summer reminds
me that the water has once stood over where I walk. Sometimes the
grooved trees tell the same tale. The wrecks of the meadow, which fill
a thousand coves, and tell a thousand tales to those who can read them.
Our prairial, mediterranean shore. The gentle rise of water around
the trees in the meadow, where oaks and maples stand far out in the
sea, and young elms sometimes are seen standing close around some rock
which lifts its head above the water, as if protecting it, preventing
it from being washed away, though in truth they owe their origin and
preservation to it. It first invited and detained their seed, and now
preserves the soil in which they grow. A pleasant reminiscence of the
rise of waters, to go up one side of the river and down the other,
following this way, which meanders so much more than the river itself.
If you cannot go on the ice, you are then gently compelled to take this
course, which is on the whole more beautiful,—to follow the sinuosities
of the meadow. Between the highest water mark and the present water
line is a space generally from a few feet to a few rods in width. When
the water comes over the road, then my spirits rise,—when the fences
are carried away. A prairial walk. Saw a caterpillar crawling about on
the snow.

The earth is so bare that it makes an impression on me as if it were
catching cold.

I saw to-day something new to me as I walked along the edge of the
meadow. Every half-mile or so along the channel of the river I saw at a
distance where apparently the ice had been broken up while freezing by
the pressure of other ice,—thin cakes of ice forced up on their edges
and reflecting the sun like so many mirrors, whole fleets of shining
sails, giving a very lively appearance to the river,—where for a dozen
rods the flakes of ice stood on their edges, like a fleet beating
up-stream against the sun, a fleet of ice-boats.

It is remarkable that the cracks in the ice on the meadows sometimes
may be traced a dozen rods from the water through the snow in the
neighboring fields.

It is only necessary that man should start a fence that Nature should
carry it on and complete it. The farmer cannot plow quite up to the
rails or wall which he himself has placed, and hence it often becomes
a hedgerow and sometimes a coppice.

I found to-day apples still green under the snow, and others frozen and
thawed, sweeter far than when sound,—a sugary sweetness.[136]

There is something more than association at the bottom of the
excitement which the roar of a cataract produces. It is allied to the
circulation in our veins. We have a waterfall which corresponds even
to Niagara somewhere within us.[137] It is astonishing what a rush
and tumult a slight inclination will produce in a swollen brook. How
it proclaims its glee, its boisterousness, rushing headlong in its
prodigal course as if it would exhaust itself in half an hour! How it
spends itself! I would say to the orator and poet, Flow freely and
_lavishly_ as a brook that is full,—without stint. Perchance I have
stumbled upon the origin of the word “lavish.” It does not hesitate
to tumble down the steepest precipice and roar or tinkle as it goes,
for fear it will exhaust its fountain. The impetuosity of descending
water even by the slightest inclination! It seems to flow with ever
increasing rapidity.

It is difficult to believe what philosophers assert, that it is merely
a difference in the form of the elementary particles—as whether
they are square or globular—which makes the difference between the
steadfast, everlasting, and reposing hillside and the impetuous torrent
which tumbles down it.

It is refreshing to walk over sprout-lands, where oak and chestnut
sprouts are mounting swiftly up again into the sky, and already
perchance their sere leaves begin to rustle in the breeze and reflect
the light on the hillsides.

     “Heroic underwoods that take the air
     With freedom, nor respect their parents’ death.”[138]

I trust that the walkers of the present day are conscious of the
blessings which they enjoy in the comparative freedom with which they
can ramble over the country and enjoy the landscape, anticipating with
compassion that future day when possibly it will be partitioned off
into so-called pleasure-grounds, where only a few may enjoy the narrow
and exclusive pleasure which is compatible with ownership,—when walking
over the surface of God’s earth shall be construed to mean trespassing
on some gentleman’s grounds, when fences shall be multiplied and man
traps and other engines invented to confine men to the public road. I
am thankful that we have yet so much room in America.[139]


_Feb. 13._ Skated to Sudbury. A beautiful, summer-like day. The
meadows were frozen just enough to bear. Examined now the fleets of
ice-flakes close at hand. They are a very singular and interesting
phenomenon, which I do not remember to have seen. I should say that
when the water was frozen about as thick as pasteboard, a violent gust
had here and there broken it up, and while the wind and waves held it
up on its edge, the increasing cold froze it in firmly. So it seemed,
for the flakes were for the most part turned one way; _i. e._ standing
on one side, you saw only their edges, on another—the northeast or
southwest—their sides. They were for the most part of a triangular
form, like a shoulder[_sic_]-of-mutton sail, slightly scalloped, like
shells. They looked like a fleet of a thousand mackerel-fishers under
a press of sail careering before a smacking breeze. Sometimes the
sun and wind had reduced them to the thinness of writing-paper, and
they fluttered and rustled and tinkled merrily. I skated through them
and strewed their wrecks around. They appear to have been elevated
expressly to reflect the sun like mirrors, to adorn the river and
attract the eye of the skater. Who will say that their principal end
is not answered when they excite the admiration of the skater? Every
half-mile or mile, as you skate up the river, you see these crystal
fleets. Nature is a great imitator and loves to repeat herself. She
wastes her wonders on the town. It impresses me as one superiority in
her art, if art it may be called, that she does not require that man
appreciate her, takes no steps to attract his attention.

  [Illustration]

The trouble is in getting on and off the ice; when you are once on you
can go well enough. It melts round the edges.

Again I saw to-day, half a mile off in Sudbury, a sandy spot on the top
of a hill, where I prophesied that I should find traces of the Indians.
When within a dozen rods, I distinguished the foundation of a lodge,
and merely passing over it, I saw many fragments of the arrowhead
stone. I have frequently distinguished these localities half a mile
[off], gone forward, and picked up arrowheads.

Saw in a warm, muddy brook in Sudbury, quite open and exposed, the
skunk-cabbage spathes above water. The tops of the spathes were
frost-bitten, but the fruit [_sic_] sound. There was one partly
expanded. The first flower of the season; for it is a flower. I doubt
if there is [a] month without its flower. Examined by the botany all
its parts,—the first flower I have seen. The _Ictodes fœtidus_.

Also mosses, mingled red and green. The red will pass for the blossom.

As for antiquities, one of our old deserted country roads, marked only
by the parallel fences and cellar-hole with its bricks where the last
inhabitant died, the victim of intemperance, fifty years ago, with
its bare and exhausted fields stretching around, suggests to me an
antiquity greater and more remote from the America of the newspapers
than the tombs of Etruria. I insert the rise and fall of Rome in the
interval. This is the decline and fall of the Roman Empire.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is important to observe not only the subject of our pure and
unalloyed joys, but also the secret of any dissatisfaction one may
feel.

In society, in the best institutions of men, I remark a certain
precocity. When we should be growing children, we are already little
men. Infants as we are, we make haste to be weaned from our great
mother’s breast, and cultivate our parts by intercourse with one
another.

I have not much faith in the method of restoring impoverished soils
which relies on manuring mainly and does not add some virgin soil or
muck.

Many a poor, sore-eyed student that I have heard of would grow faster,
both intellectually and physically, if, instead of sitting up so very
late to study, he honestly slumbered a fool’s allowance.[140]

I would not have every man cultivated, any more than I would have every
acre of earth cultivated. Some must be preparing a mould by the annual
decay of the forests which they sustain.[141]

Saw half a dozen cows let out and standing about in a retired meadow as
in a cow-yard.


_Feb. 14._ Consider the farmer, who is commonly regarded as the
healthiest man. He may be the toughest, but he is not the healthiest.
He has lost his elasticity; he can neither run nor jump. Health is
the free use and command of all our faculties, and equal development.
His is the health of the ox, an overworked buffalo. His joints are
stiff. The resemblance is true even in particulars. He is cast away in
a pair of cowhide boots, and travels at an ox’s pace. Indeed, in some
places he puts his foot into the skin of an ox’s shin. It would do
him good to be thoroughly shampooed to make him supple. His health is
an insensibility to all influence. But only the healthiest man in the
world is sensible to the finest influence; he who is affected by more
or less of electricity in the air.

We shall see but little way if we require to understand what we see.
How few things can a man measure with the tape of his understanding!
How many greater things might he be seeing in the meanwhile!

One afternoon in the fall, November 21st, I saw Fair Haven Pond with
its island and meadow; between the island and the shore, a strip of
perfectly smooth water in the lee of the island; and two hawks sailing
over it; and something more I saw which cannot easily be described,
which made me say to myself that the landscape could not be improved.
I did not see how it could be improved. Yet I do not know what these
things can be; I begin to see such objects only when I leave off
understanding them, and afterwards remember that I did not appreciate
them before. But I get no further than this. How adapted these forms
and colors to our eyes, a meadow and its islands! What are these
things? Yet the hawks and the ducks keep so aloof, and nature is so
reserved! We are made to love the river and the meadow, as the wind to
ripple the water.[142]

There is a difference between eating for strength and from mere
gluttony. The Hottentots eagerly devour the marrow of the koodoo and
other antelopes raw, as a matter of course, and herein perchance have
stolen a march on the cooks of Paris. The eater of meat must come to
this. This is better than stall-fed cattle and slaughter-house pork.
Possibly they derive a certain wild-animal vigor therefrom which the
most artfully cooked meats do not furnish.[143]

We learn by the January thaw that the winter is intermittent and are
reminded of other seasons. The back of the winter is broken.


_Feb. 15._ Fatal is the discovery that our friend is fallible, that he
has prejudices. He is, then, only prejudiced in our favor. What is the
value of his esteem who does not justly esteem another?

Alas! Alas! when my friend begins to deal in confessions, breaks
silence, makes a theme of friendship (which then is always something
past), and descends to merely human relations! As long as there is a
spark of love remaining, cherish that alone. Only _that_ can be kindled
into a flame. I thought that friendship, that love was still possible
between [us]. I thought that we had not withdrawn very far asunder.
But now that my friend rashly, thoughtlessly, profanely speaks,
_recognizing_ the distance between us, that distance seems infinitely
increased.

Of our friends we do not incline to speak, to complain, to others; we
would not disturb the foundations of confidence that may still be.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why should we not still continue to live with the intensity and
rapidity of infants? Is not the world, are not the heavens, as
unfathomed as ever? Have we exhausted any joy, any sentiment?

       *       *       *       *       *

The author of Festus well exclaims:—

     “Could we but think with the intensity
     We love with, we might do great things, I think.”


_Feb. 16._ Do we call this the land of the free? What is it to be free
from King George the Fourth and continue the slaves of prejudice? What
is it [to] be born free and equal, and not to live? What is the value
of any political freedom, but as a means to moral freedom? Is it a
freedom to be slaves or a freedom to be free, of which we boast? We are
a nation of politicians, concerned about the outsides of freedom, the
means and outmost defenses of freedom. It is our children’s children
who may perchance be essentially free. We tax ourselves unjustly.
There is a part of us which is not represented. It is taxation without
representation. We quarter troops upon ourselves. In respect to virtue
or true manhood, we are essentially provincial, not metropolitan,—mere
Jonathans. We are provincial, because we do not find at home our
standards; because we do not worship truth but the reflection of truth;
because we are absorbed in and narrowed by trade and commerce and
agriculture, which are but means and not the end. We are essentially
provincial, I say, and so is the English Parliament. Mere country
bumpkins they betray themselves, when any more important question
arises for them to settle. Their natures are subdued to what they work
in!

The finest manners in the world are awkwardness and fatuity when
contrasted with a finer intelligence. They appear but as the fashions
of past days,—mere courtliness, small-clothes, and knee-buckles,—have
the vice of getting out of date; an attitude merely. The vice of
manners is that they are continually deserted by the character; they
are cast-off clothes or shells, claiming the respect of the living
creature. You are presented with the shells instead of the meat, and
it is no excuse generally that, in the case of some fish, the shells
are of more worth than the meat. The man who thrusts his manners upon
me does as if he were to insist on introducing me to his cabinet
of curiosities, when I wish to see himself. Manners are conscious;
character is unconscious.[144]

My neighbor does not recover from his formal bow so soon as I do from
the pleasure of meeting him.

       *       *       *       *       *

_Feb. 18. Tuesday._ Ground nearly bare of snow. Pleasant day with a
strong south wind. Skated, though the ice was soft in spots. Saw the
skunk-cabbage in flower. Gathered nuts and apples on the bare ground,
still sound and preserving their colors, red and green, many of them.

Yesterday the river was over the road by Hubbard’s Bridge.

Surveyed White Pond yesterday, February 17th.

There is little or nothing to be remembered written on the subject
of getting an honest living. Neither the New Testament nor Poor
Richard speaks to our condition. I cannot think of a single page which
entertains, much less answers, the questions which I put to myself on
this subject. How to make the getting our living poetic! for if it is
not poetic, it is not life but death that we get. Is it that men are
too disgusted with their experience to speak of it? or that commonly
they do not question the common modes? The most practically important
of all questions, it seems to me, is how shall I get my living, and
yet I find little or nothing said to the purpose in any book. Those
who are living on the interest of money inherited, or dishonestly, _i.
e._ by false methods, acquired, are of course incompetent to answer it.
I consider that society with all its arts, has done nothing for us in
this respect. One would think, from looking at literature, that this
question had never disturbed a solitary individual’s musings. Cold and
hunger seem more friendly to my nature than those methods which men
have adopted and advise to ward them off.[145] If it were not that I
desire to do something here,—accomplish some work,—I should certainly
prefer to suffer and die rather than be at the pains to get a living by
the modes men propose.

There may be an excess even of informing light.

Niepce, a Frenchman, announced that “no substance can be exposed to
the sun’s rays without undergoing a chemical change.” Granite rocks
and stone structures and statues of metal, etc., “are,” says Robert
Hunt, “all alike destructively acted upon during the hours of sunshine,
and, but for provisions of nature no less wonderful, would soon perish
under the delicate touch of the most subtile of the agencies of the
universe.” But Niepce showed, says Hunt, “that those bodies which
underwent this change during daylight possessed the power of restoring
themselves to their original conditions during the hours of night, when
this excitement was no longer influencing them.” So, in the case of the
daguerreotype, “the picture which we receive to-night, unless we adopt
some method of securing its permanency, fades away before the morning,
and we try to restore it in vain.” (Infers) “the hours of darkness
are as necessary to the inorganic creation as we know night and sleep
are to the organic kingdom.” Such is the influence of “actinism,” that
power in the sun’s rays which produces a chemical effect.[146]


_Feb. 25._ A very windy day. A slight snow which fell last night was
melted at noon. A strong, gusty wind; the waves on the meadows make a
fine show. I saw at Hubbard’s Bridge that all the ice had been blown
up-stream from the meadows, and was collected over the channel against
the bridge in large cakes. These were covered and intermingled with a
remarkable quantity of the meadow’s crust. There was no ice to be seen
up-stream and no more downstream.

The meadows have been flooded for a fortnight, and this water has
been frozen barely thick enough to bear once only. The old ice on the
meadows was covered several feet deep. I observed from the bridge, a
few rods off northward, what looked like an island directly over the
channel. It was the crust of the meadow afloat. I reached [it] with
a little risk and found it to be four rods long by one broad,—the
surface of the meadow with cranberry vines, etc., all connected and
in their natural position, and no ice visible but around its edges. It
appeared to be the frozen crust (which was separated from the unfrozen
soil as ice is from the water beneath), buoyed up (?), perchance, by
the ice around its edges frozen to the stubble. Was there any pure
ice under it? Had there been any above it? Will frozen meadow float?
Had ice which originally supported it from above melted except about
the edges? When the ice melts or the soil thaws, of course it falls
to the bottom, wherever it may be. Here is another agent employed in
the distribution of plants. I have seen where a smooth shore which I
frequented for bathing was in one season strewn with these hummocks,
bearing the button-bush with them, which have now changed the character
of the shore. There were many rushes and lily-pad stems on the ice. Had
the ice formed about them as they grew, broken them off when it floated
away, and so they were strewn about on it?


_Feb. 26. Wednesday._ Examined the floating meadow again to-day. It
is more than a foot thick, the under part much mixed with ice,—ice
and muck. It appeared to me that the meadow surface had been heaved by
the frost, and then the water had run down and under it, and finally,
when the ice rose, lifted it up, wherever there was ice enough mixed
with it to float it. I saw large cakes of ice with other large cakes,
the latter as big as a table, on top of them. Probably the former rose
while the latter were already floating about. The plants scattered
about were bulrushes and lily-pad stems.

Saw five red-wings and a song sparrow (?) this afternoon.


_Feb. 27._ Saw to-day on Pine Hill behind Mr. Joseph Merriam’s house
a Norway pine, the first I have seen in Concord. Mr. Gleason pointed
it out to me as a singular pine which he did not know the name of. It
was a very handsome tree, about twenty-five feet high. E. Wood thinks
that he has lost the surface of two acres of his meadow by the ice. Got
fifteen cartloads out of a hummock left on another meadow. Blue-joint
was introduced into the first meadow where it did not grow before.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of two men, one of whom knows nothing about a subject, and, what is
extremely rare, knows that he knows nothing, and the other really knows
something about it, but thinks that he knows all,—what great advantage
has the latter over the former? which is the best to deal with? I do
not know that knowledge amounts to anything more definite than a novel
and grand surprise, or a sudden revelation of the insufficiency of
all that we had called knowledge before; an indefinite sense of the
grandeur and glory of the universe. It is the lighting up of the mist
by the sun. But man cannot be said to know in any higher sense, [any
more] than he can look serenely and with impunity in the face of the
sun.[147]

A culture which imports much muck from the meadows and deepens
the soil, not that which trusts to heating manures and improved
agricultural implements only.

       *       *       *       *       *

How, when a man purchases a thing, he is determined to get and get hold
of it, using how many expletives and how long a string of synonymous
or similar terms signifying possession, in the legal process! What’s
mine’s my own. An old deed of a small piece of swamp land, which I have
lately surveyed at the risk of being mired past recovery, says that
“the said Spaulding his Heirs and Assigns, shall and may from this (?)
time, and at all times forever hereafter, by force and virtue of these
presents, lawfully, peaceably and quietly have, hold, use, occupy,
possess and enjoy the said swamp,” etc.

       *       *       *       *       *

Magnetic iron, being anciently found in _Magnesia_,—hence _magnes_, or
magnet,—employed by Pliny and others. Chinese appear to have discovered
the magnet very early, A. D. 121 and before (?); used by them to steer
ships in 419; mentioned by an Icelander, 1068; in a French poem, 1181;
in Torfæus’ History of Norway, 1266. Used by De Gama in 1427. Leading
stone, hence loadstone.

The peroxide of hydrogen, or ozone, at first thought to be a chemical
curiosity merely, is found to be very generally diffused through
nature.

The following bears on the floating ice which has risen from the bottom
of the meadows. Robert Hunt says: “Water conducts heat downward but
very slowly; a mass of ice will remain undissolved but a few inches
under water on the surface of which ether or any other inflammable
body is burning. If ice swam beneath the surface, the summer sun would
scarcely have power to thaw it; and thus our lakes and seas would be
gradually converted into solid masses.”

The figures of serpents, of griffins, flying dragons, and other
embellishments of heraldry, the eastern idea of the world on an
elephant, that on a tortoise, and that on a serpent again, etc.,
usually regarded as mythological in the common sense of that word,
are thought by some to “indicate a faint and shadowy knowledge of a
previous state of organic existence,” such as geology partly reveals.

The fossil tortoise has been found in Asia large enough to support an
elephant.

Ammonites, snake-stones, or petrified snakes have been found from of
old, often decapitated.

In the northern part of Great Britain the fossil remains of encrinites
are called “St. Cuthbert’s beads.” “Fiction dependent on truth.”

Westward is heaven, or rather heavenward is the west. The way to heaven
is from east to west round the earth. The sun leads and shows it. The
stars, too, light it.

Nature and man; some prefer the one, others the other; but that is all
_de gustibus_. It makes no odds at what well you drink, provided it be
a well-head.

Walking in the woods, it may be, some afternoon, the shadow of the
wings of a thought flits across the landscape of my mind, and I am
reminded how little eventful are our lives. What have been all these
wars and rumors of wars, and modern discoveries and improvements
so-called? A mere irritation in the skin. But this shadow which is so
soon past, and whose substance is not detected, suggests that there
are events of importance whose interval is to us a true historic
period.[148]

The lecturer is wont to describe the Nineteenth Century, the
American [of] the last generation, in an off-hand and triumphant
strain, wafting him to paradise, spreading his fame by steam and
telegraph, recounting the number of wooden stopples he has whittled.
But who does not perceive that this is not a sincere or pertinent
account of any man’s or nation’s life? It is the hip-hip-hurrah
and mutual-admiration-society style. Cars go by, and we know their
substance as well as their shadow. They stop and we get into them. But
those sublime thoughts passing on high do not stop, and we never get
into them. Their conductor is not like one of us.

I feel that the man who, in his conversation with me about the life
of man in New England, lays much stress on railroads, telegraphs, and
such enterprises does not go below the surface of things. He treats the
shallow and transitory as if it were profound and enduring. In one of
the mind’s avatars, in the interval between sleeping and waking, aye,
even in one of the interstices of a Hindoo dynasty, perchance, such
things as the Nineteenth Century, with all its improvements, may come
and go again. Nothing makes a deep and lasting impression but what is
weighty.

Obey the law which reveals, and not the law revealed.

I wish my neighbors were wilder.

A wildness whose glance no civilization could endure.[149]

He who lives according to the highest law is in one sense lawless. That
is an unfortunate discovery, certainly, that of a law which binds us
where we did not know that we were bound. Live free, child of the mist!
He for whom the law is made, who does not obey the law but whom the
law obeys, reclines on pillows of down and is wafted at will whither
he pleases, for man is superior to all laws, both of heaven and earth,
when he takes his liberty.[150]

Wild as if we lived on the marrow of antelopes devoured raw.[151]

There would seem to be men in whose lives there have been no events of
importance, more than in the beetle’s which crawls in our path.


_March 19._ The ice in the pond is now soft and will not bear a heavy
stone thrown from the bank. It is melted for a rod from the shore. The
ground has been bare of snow for some weeks, but yesterday we had a
violent northeast snow-storm, which has drifted worse than any the past
winter. The spring birds—ducks and geese, etc.—had come, but now the
spring seems far off.

No good ever came of obeying a law which you had discovered.


_March 23._ For a week past the elm buds have been swollen. The willow
catkins have put out. The ice still remains in Walden, though it will
not bear. Mather Howard saw a large meadow near his house which had
risen up but was prevented from floating away by the bushes.


_March 27._ Walden is two-thirds broken up. It will probably be quite
open by to-morrow night.


_March 30._ Spring is already upon us. I see the tortoises, or rather
I hear them drop from the bank into the brooks at my approach. The
catkins of the alders have blossomed. The pads are springing at the
bottom of the water. The pewee is heard, and the lark.

       *       *       *       *       *

“It is only the squalid savages and degraded boschmen of creation that
have their feeble teeth and tiny stings steeped in venom, and so made
formidable,”—ants, centipedes, and mosquitoes, spiders, wasps, and
scorpions.—HUGH MILLER.

To attain to a true relation to one human creature is enough to make a
year memorable.

The man for whom law exists—the man of forms, the conservative—is a
tame man.


CARRYING OFF SIMS

A recent English writer (De Quincey),[152] endeavoring to account for
the atrocities of Caligula and Nero, their monstrous and anomalous
cruelties, and the general servility and corruption which they imply,
observes that it is difficult to believe that “the descendants of a
people so severe in their habits” as the Romans had been “could thus
rapidly” have degenerated and that, “in reality, the citizens of Rome
were at this time a new race, brought together from every quarter
of the world, but especially from Asia.” A vast “proportion of the
ancient citizens had been cut off by the sword,” and such multitudes
of emancipated slaves from Asia had been invested with the rights of
citizens “that, in a single generation, Rome became almost transmuted
into a baser metal.” As Juvenal complained, “the Orontes ... had
mingled its impure waters with those of the Tiber.” And “probably,
in the time of Nero, not one man in six was of pure Roman descent.”
Instead of such, says another, “came Syrians, Cappadocians, Phrygians,
and other enfranchised slaves.” “These in half a century had sunk so
low, that Tiberius pronounced her [Rome’s][153] very senators to be
_homines ad servitutem natos_, men born to be slaves.”[154]

So one would say, in the absence of particular genealogical evidence,
that the vast majority of the inhabitants of the city of Boston,
even those of senatorial dignity,—the Curtises, Lunts, Woodburys,
and others,—were not descendants of the men of the Revolution,—the
Hancocks, Adamses, Otises,—but some “Syrians, Cappadocians, and
Phrygians,” merely, _homines ad servitutem natos_, men born to be
slaves. But I would have done with comparing ourselves with our
ancestors, for on the whole I believe that even they, if somewhat
braver and less corrupt than we, were not men of so much principle and
generosity as to go to war in behalf of another race in their midst. I
do not believe that the North will soon come to blows with the South
on this question. It would be too bright a page to be written in the
history of the race at present.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is such an officer, if not such a man, as the Governor of
Massachusetts. What has he been about the last fortnight? He has
probably had as much as he could do to keep on the fence during this
moral earthquake. It seems to me that no such keen satire, no such
cutting insult, could be offered to that man, as the absence of all
inquiry after him in this crisis. It appears to [have] been forgotten
that there was such a man or such an office. Yet no doubt he has been
filling the gubernatorial chair all the while. One Mr. Boutwell,—so
named, perchance, because he goes about well to suit the prevailing
wind.[155]

In ’75 two or three hundred of the inhabitants of Concord assembled
at one of the bridges with arms in their hands to assert the right
of three millions to tax themselves, to have a voice in governing
themselves. About a week ago the authorities of Boston, having the
sympathy of many of the inhabitants of Concord, assembled in the gray
of the dawn, assisted by a still larger armed force, to send back a
perfectly innocent man, and one whom they knew to be innocent, into a
slavery as complete as the world ever knew. Of course it makes not the
least difference—I wish you to consider this—who the man was,—whether
he was Jesus Christ or another,—for inasmuch as ye did it unto the
least of these his brethren ye did it unto him. Do you think _he_ would
have stayed here in liberty and let the black man go into slavery in
his stead? They sent him back, I say, to live in slavery with other
three millions—mark that—whom the same slave power, or slavish power,
North and South, holds in that condition,—three millions who do not,
like the first mentioned, assert the right to govern themselves but
simply to run away and stay away from their prison.

Just a week afterward, those inhabitants of this town who especially
sympathize with the authorities of Boston in this their deed caused the
bells to be rung and the cannon to be fired to celebrate the courage
and the love of liberty of those men who assembled at the bridge. As if
_those_ three millions had fought for the right to be free themselves,
but to hold in slavery three million others. Why, gentlemen, even
consistency, though it is much abused, is sometimes a virtue. Every
humane and intelligent inhabitant of Concord, when he or she heard
those bells and those cannon, thought not so much of the events of the
19th of April, 1775, as of the event of the 12th of April, 1851.

I wish my townsmen to consider that, whatever the human law may be,
neither an individual nor a nation can ever deliberately commit the
least act of injustice without having to pay the penalty for it. A
government which deliberately enacts injustice, and persists in it!—it
will become the laughing-stock of the world.

Much as has been said about American slavery, I think that commonly
we do not yet realize what slavery is. If I were seriously to propose
to Congress to make mankind into sausages, I have no doubt that most
would smile at my proposition and, if any believed me to be in earnest,
they would think that I proposed something much worse than Congress had
ever done. But, gentlemen, if any of you will tell me that to make a
man into a sausage would be much worse—would be any worse—than to make
him into a slave,—than it was then to enact the fugitive slave law,—I
shall here accuse him of foolishness, of intellectual incapacity, of
making a distinction without a difference. The one is just as sensible
a proposition as the other.[156]

When I read the account of the carrying back of the fugitive into
slavery, which was read last Sunday evening, and read also what was not
read here, that the man who made the prayer on the wharf was Daniel
Foster of _Concord_, I could not help feeling a slight degree of
pride because, of all the towns in the Commonwealth, Concord was the
only one distinctly named as being represented in that new tea-party,
and, as she had a place in the first, so would have a place in this,
the last and perhaps next most important chapter of the History of
Massachusetts. But my second feeling, when I reflected how short a
time that gentleman has resided in this town, was one of doubt and
shame, because the _men_ of Concord in recent times have done nothing
to entitle them to the honor of having their town named in such a
connection.

I hear a good deal said about trampling this law under foot. Why, one
need not go out of his way to do that. This law lies not at the level
of the head or the reason. Its natural habitat is in the dirt. It was
bred and has its life only in the dust and mire, on a level with the
feet; and he who walks with freedom, unless, with a sort of quibbling
and Hindoo mercy, he avoids treading on every venomous reptile, will
inevitably tread on it, and so trample it under foot.

It has come to this, that the friends of liberty, the friends of the
slave, have shuddered when they have understood that his fate has been
left to the legal tribunals, so-called, of the country to be decided.
The people have no faith that justice will be awarded in such a case.
The judge may decide this way or that; it is a kind of accident
at best. It is evident that he is not a competent authority in so
important a case. I would not trust the life of my friend to the judges
of all the Supreme Courts in the world put together, to be sacrificed
or saved by precedent. I would much rather trust to the sentiment of
the people, which would itself be a precedent to posterity. In their
vote you would get something worth having at any rate, but in the other
case only the trammelled judgment of an individual, of no significance,
be it which way it will.

I think that recent events will be valuable as a criticism on the
administration of justice in our midst, or rather as revealing what
are the true sources of justice in any community. It is to some extent
fatal to the courts when the people are compelled to go behind the
courts. They learn that the courts are made for fair weather and for
very civil cases.[157]

     [Two pages missing.]

let us entertain opinions of our own;[158] let us be a town and not
a suburb, as far from Boston in this sense as we were by the old road
which led through Lexington; a place where tyranny may ever be met with
firmness and driven back with defeat to its ships.

Concord has several more bridges left of the same sort, which she is
taxed to maintain. Can she not raise men to defend them?

       *       *       *       *       *

As for measures to be adopted, among others I would advise
abolitionists to make as earnest and vigorous and persevering an
assault on the press, as they have already made, and with effect too,
on the church. The church has decidedly improved within a year or
two, aye, even within a fortnight; but the press is, almost without
exception, corrupt. I believe that in this country the press exerts a
greater and a more pernicious influence than the church. We are not a
religious people, but we are a nation of politicians. We do not much
care for, we do not read, the Bible, but we do care for and we do read
the newspaper. It is a bible which we read every morning and every
afternoon, standing and sitting, riding and walking. It is a bible
which every man carries in his pocket, which lies on every table and
counter, which the mail and thousands of missionaries are continually
dispersing. It is the only book which America has printed, and is
capable of exerting an almost inconceivable influence for good or for
bad. The editor is [a] preacher whom you voluntarily support. Your tax
is commonly one cent, and it costs nothing for pew hire. But how many
of these preachers preach the truth? I repeat the testimony of many
an intelligent traveller, as well as my own convictions, when I say
that probably no country was ever ruled by so mean a class of tyrants
as are the editors of the periodical press in _this_ country. Almost
without exception the tone of the press is mercenary and servile. The
_Commonwealth_, and the _Liberator_, are the only papers, as far as
I know, which make themselves heard in condemnation of the cowardice
and meanness of the authorities of Boston as lately exhibited. The
other journals, almost without exception,—as the _Advertiser_, the
_Transcript_, the _Journal_, the _Times_, _Bee_, _Herald_, etc.,—by
their manner of referring to and speaking of the Fugitive Slave Law or
the carrying back of the slave, insult the common sense of the country.
And they do this for the most part, because they think so to secure the
approbation of their patrons, and also, one would think, because they
are not aware that a sounder sentiment prevails to any extent.

But, thank fortune, this preacher can be more easily reached by the
weapons of the reformer than could the recreant priest. The _free_ men
of New England have only to refrain from purchasing and reading these
sheets, have only to withhold their cents, to kill a score of them at
once.[159]

       *       *       *       *       *

Mahomet made his celestial journey in so short a time that “on his
return he was able to prevent the complete overturn of a vase of water,
which the angel Gabriel had struck with his wing on his departure.”

When he took refuge in a cave near Mecca, being on his flight
(Hegira) to Medina, “by the time that the Koreishites [who were close
behind][160] reached the mouth of the cavern, an acacia tree had sprung
up before it, in the spreading branches of which a pigeon had made
its nest, and laid its eggs, and over the whole a spider had woven its
web.”

He said of himself, “I am no king, but the son of a Koreishite woman,
who ate flesh dried in the sun.”

He exacted “a tithe of the productions of the earth, where it was
fertilized by brooks and rain; and a twentieth part where its fertility
was the result of irrigation.”


_April 22._ Had mouse-ear in blossom for a week. Observed the crowfoot
on the Cliffs in abundance, and the saxifrage. The wind last Wednesday,
April 16th, blew down a hundred pines on Fair Haven Hill.

Having treated my friend ill, I wished to apologize; but, not meeting
him, I made an apology to myself.

It is not the invitation which I hear, but which I feel, that I obey.


_April 26._ The judge whose words seal the fate of a man for the
longest time and furthest into eternity is not he who merely pronounces
the verdict of the law, but he, whoever he may be, who, from a love
of truth and unprejudiced by any custom or enactment of men, utters a
true opinion or _sentence_ concerning him. He it is that _sentences_
him.[161] More fatal, as affecting his good or ill fame, is the
utterance of the least inexpugnable truth concerning him, by the
humblest individual, than the sentence of the supremest court in the
land.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gathered the mayflower and cowslips yesterday, and saw the houstonia,
violets, etc. Saw a dandelion in blossom.

       *       *       *       *       *

Are they Americans, are they New-Englanders, are they inhabitants
of Concord,—Buttricks and Davises and Hosmers by name,—who read and
support the Boston _Herald_, _Advertiser_, _Traveller_, _Journal_,
_Transcript_, etc., etc., _Times_? Is that the _Flag of our Union_?

Could slavery suggest a more complete servility? Is there any dust
which such conduct does not lick and make fouler still with its slime?
Has not the Boston _Herald_ acted its part well, served its master
faithfully? How could it have gone lower on its belly? How can a man
stoop lower than he is low? do more than put his extremities in the
place of that head he has? than make his head his _lower_ extremity?
And when I say the Boston _Herald_ I mean the Boston press, with such
few and slight exceptions as need not be made. When I have taken up
this paper or the Boston _Times_, with my cuffs turned up, I have
heard the gurgling of the sewer through every column; I have felt
that I was handling a paper picked out of the public sewers, a leaf
from the gospel of the gambling-house, the groggery, and the brothel,
harmonizing with the gospel of the Merchants’ Exchange.[162]

I do not know but there are some who, if they were tied to the
whipping-post and could but get one hand free, would use it to ring
the bells and fire the cannon to celebrate their liberty. It reminded
me of the Roman Saturnalia, on which even the slaves were allowed to
take some liberty. So some of you took the liberty to ring and fire.
That was the extent of your freedom; and when the sound of the bells
died away, your liberty died away also, and when the powder was all
expended, your liberty went off with the smoke. Nowadays men wear a
fool’s-cap and call it a liberty-cap. The joke could be no broader
if the inmates of the prisons were to subscribe for all the powder to
be used in such salutes, and hire their jailors to do the firing and
ringing for them.[163]


_April 29._ Every man, perhaps, is inclined to think his own situation
singular in relation to friendship. Our thoughts would imply that other
men _have_ friends, though we have not. But I do not know of two whom
I can speak of as standing in this relation to one another. Each one
makes a standing offer to mankind, “On such and such terms I will give
myself to you;” but it is only by a miracle that his terms are ever
accepted.

We have to defend ourselves even against those who are nearest to
friendship with us.

What a difference it is!—to perform the pilgrimage of life in the
society of a mate, and not to have an acquaintance among all the tribes
of men!

What signifies the census—this periodical numbering of men—to one who
has no friend?

I distinguish between my _actual_ and my _real_ communication with
individuals. I _really_ communicate with my friends and congratulate
myself and them on our relation and rejoice in their presence and
society oftenest when they are personally absent. I remember that not
long ago, as I laid my head on my pillow for the night, I was visited
by an inexpressible joy that I was permitted to know and be related
to such mortals as I was then actually related to; and yet no special
event that I could think of had occurred to remind me of any with
whom I was connected, and by the next noon, perchance, those essences
that had caused me joy would have receded somewhat. I experienced a
remarkable gladness in the thought that they existed. Their existence
was then blessed to me. Yet such has never been my actual waking
relation to any.

Every one experiences that, while his relation to another actually may
be one of distrust and disappointment, he may still have relations to
him ideally and so really, in spite of both. He is faintly conscious of
a confidence and satisfaction somewhere, and all further intercourse is
based on this experience of success.

The very dogs and cats incline to affection in their relation to man.
It often happens that a man is more humanely related to a cat or dog
than to any human being. What bond is it relates us to any animal we
keep in the house but the bond of affection? In a degree we grow to
love one another.


_April 30._ What is a chamber to which the sun does not rise in the
morning? What is a chamber to which the sun does not set at evening?
Such are often the chambers of the mind, for the most part.

Even the cat which lies on a rug all day commences to prowl about the
fields at night, resumes her ancient forest habits. The most tenderly
bred grimalkin steals forth at night,—watches some bird on its perch
for an hour in the furrow, like a gun at rest. She catches no cold;
it is her nature. Caressed by children and cherished with a saucer of
milk. Even she can erect her back and expand her tail and spit at her
enemies like the wild cat of the woods. Sweet Sylvia!

What is the singing of birds, or any natural sound, compared with the
voice of one we love?

To one we love we are related as to nature in the spring. Our dreams
are mutually intelligible. We take the census, and find that there is
one.

Love is a mutual confidence whose foundations no one knows. The one I
love surpasses all the laws of nature in sureness. Love is capable of
any wisdom.

     “He that hath love and judgment too
     Sees more than any other doe.”

By our very mutual attraction, and our attraction to all other spheres,
kept properly asunder. Two planets which are mutually attracted, being
at the same time attracted by the sun, preserve equipoise and harmony.

Does not the history of chivalry and knight-errantry suggest or point
to another relation to woman than leads to marriage, yet an elevating
and all-absorbing one, perchance transcending marriage? As yet men know
not one another, nor does man know woman.

I am sure that the design of my maker when he has brought me nearest
to woman was not the propagation, but rather the maturation, of the
species. Man is capable of a love of woman quite transcending marriage.

I observe that the _New York Herald_ advertises situations wanted by
“respectable young women” by the column, but never by respectable young
men, rather “intelligent” and “smart” ones; from which I infer that the
public opinion of New York does not require young men to be respectable
in the same sense in which it requires young women to be so.

May it consist with the health of some bodies to be impure?