Chapter XIV JUNE, 1851.

_June 3. Tuesday._ Lectured in Worcester last Saturday, and walked to
_As-_ or _Has_nebumskit Hill in Paxton the next day. Said to be the
highest land in Worcester County except Wachusett.

Met Mr. Blake, Brown, Chamberlin, Hinsdale, Miss Butman (?), Wyman,
Conant.

Returned to Boston yesterday. Conversed with John Downes, who is
connected with the Coast Survey, is printing tables for astronomical,
geodesic, and other uses. He tells me that he once saw the common
sucker in numbers piling up stones as big as his fist (like the piles
which I have seen), taking them up or moving them with their mouths.

Dr. Harris suggests that the mountain cranberry which I saw at Ktaadn
was the _Vaccinium Vitis-Idæa_, cow-berry, because it was edible and
not the _Uva-Ursi_, or bear-berry, which we have in Concord.

Saw the _Uvularia perfoliata_, perfoliate bellwort, in Worcester near
the hill; an abundance of mountain laurel on the hills, now budded to
blossom and the fresh lighter growth contrasting with the dark green;
an abundance of very large checkerberries, or partridge-berries, as
Bigelow calls them, on Hasnebumskit. Sugar maples about there. A very
extensive view, but the western view not so much wilder as I expected.
See Barre, about fifteen miles off, and Rutland, etc., etc. Not so much
forest as in our neighborhood; high, swelling hills, but less shade for
the walker. The hills are green, the soil springier; and it is written
that water is more easily obtained on the hill than in the valleys. Saw
a Scotch fir, the pine so valued for tar and naval uses in the north of
Europe.

Mr. Chamberlin told me that there was no corporation in Worcester
except the banks (which I suspect may not be literally true), and
hence their freedom and independence. I think it likely there is a gas
company to light the streets at least.

John Mactaggart finds the ice thickest not in the largest lakes in
Canada, nor in the smallest, where the surrounding forests melt it. He
says that the surveyor of the boundary-line between England and United
States on the Columbia River saw pine trees which would require sixteen
feet in the blade to a cross-cut saw to do anything with them.

I examined to-day a large swamp white oak in Hubbard’s meadow, which
was blown down by the same storm which destroyed the lighthouse.
At five feet from the ground it was nine and three fourths feet
in circumference; the first branch at eleven and a half feet from
ground; and it held its size up to twenty-three feet from the ground.
Its whole height, measured on the ground, was eighty feet, and its
breadth about sixty-six feet. The roots on one side were turned up
with the soil on them, making an object very conspicuous a great
distance off, the highest root being eighteen feet from the ground
and fourteen feet above centre of trunk. The roots, which were small
and thickly interlaced, were from three to nine inches beneath the
surface (in other trees I saw them level with the surface) and thence
extended fifteen to eighteen inches in depth (_i. e._ to this depth
they occupied the ground). They were broken off at about eleven feet
from the centre of the trunk and were there on an average one inch in
diameter, the largest being three inches in diameter. The longest root
was broken off at twenty feet from the centre, and was there three
quarters of an inch in diameter. The tree was rotten within. The lower
side of the soil (what was originally the lower), which clothed the
roots for nine feet from the centre of the tree, was white and clayey
to appearance, and a sparrow was sitting on three eggs within the mass.
Directly under where the massive trunk had stood, and within a foot of
the surface, you could apparently strike in a spade and meet with no
obstruction to a free cultivation. There was no taproot to be seen. The
roots were encircled with dark, nubby rings. The tree, which still had
a portion of its roots in the ground and held to them by a sliver on
the leeward side, was alive and had leaved out, though on many branches
the leaves were shrivelled again. _Quercus bicolor_ of Bigelow, _Q.
Prinus discolor_ Mx. f.

  [Illustration]

I observed the grass waving to-day for the first time,—the swift
Camilla on it. It might have been noticed before. You might have seen
it now for a week past on grain-fields.

Clover has blossomed.

I noticed the indigo-weed a week or two ago pushing up like asparagus.
Methinks it must be the small andromeda (?), that dull red mass of
leaves in the swamp, mixed perchance with the rhodora, with its dry
fruitlike appendages, as well as the _Andromeda paniculata_, else
called _ligustrina_, and the clethra. It was the golden senecio
(_Senecio aureus_) which I plucked a week ago in a meadow in Wayland.
The earliest, methinks, of the aster and autumnal-looking yellow
flowers. Its bruised stems enchanted me with their indescribable sweet
odor, like I cannot think what.

The _Phaseolus vulgaris_ includes several kinds of bush beans, of which
those I raised were one.


_June 6. Friday._ Gathered last night the strong, rank,
penetrating-scented angelica.

Under the head of the _Cicuta maculata_, or American hemlock,—“It
is a rule sanctioned by the observations of medical botanists, that
umbelliferous plants, which grow in or about the water, are of a
poisonous nature.”[191] He does not say that the angelica is poisonous,
but I suppose that it is. It has such a rank, offensive, and killing
odor as makes me think of the ingredients of the witches’ cauldron. It
did not leave my hands, which had carried it, long after I had washed
them. A strong, penetrating, lasting, and sickening odor.

Gathered to-night the _Cicuta maculata_, American hemlock, the veins of
the leaflets ending in the notches and the root fasciculated.

Bigelow says, “The leaves of the _Solidago odora_ have a delightfully
fragrant odor, partaking of that of anise and sassafras, but different
from either.”[192]


_June 7._ My practicalness is not to be trusted to the last. To be
sure, I go upon my legs for the most part, but, being hard-pushed and
dogged by a superficial common sense which is bound to near objects
by beaten paths, I am off the handle, as the phrase is,—I begin to be
transcendental and show where my heart is. I am like those guinea-fowl
which Charles Darwin saw at the Cape de Verd Islands. He says, “They
avoided us like partridges on a rainy day in September, running with
their heads cocked up; and if pursued, they readily took to the wing.”
Keep your distance, do not infringe on the interval between us, and I
will pick up lime and lay real terrestrial eggs for you, and let you
know by cackling when I have done it.

When I have been asked to speak at a temperance meeting, my answer has
been, “I am too transcendental to serve you in your way.” They would
fain confine me to the rum-sellers and rum-drinkers, of whom I am not
one, and whom I know little about.

It is a certain faeryland where we live. You may walk out in any
direction over the earth’s surface, lifting your horizon, and
everywhere your path, climbing the convexity of the globe, leads you
between heaven and earth, not away from the light of the sun and stars
and the habitations of men. I wonder that I ever get five miles on
my way, the walk is so crowded with events and phenomena. How many
questions there are which I have not put to the inhabitants!

But how far can you carry _your_ practicalness? How far does your
knowledge really extend? When I have read in deeds only a hundred years
old the words “to enjoy and possess, he and his assigns, _forever_,”
I have seen how short-sighted is the sense which conducts from day to
day. When I read the epitaphs of those who died a century ago, they
seem deader even than they expected. A day seems proportionally a long
part of your “forever and a day.”

There are few so temperate and chaste that they can afford to remind us
even at table that they have a palate and a stomach.

We believe that the possibility of the future far exceeds the
accomplishment of the past. We review the past with the common sense,
but we anticipate the future with transcendental senses. In our sanest
moments we find ourselves naturally expecting or prepared for far
greater changes than any which we have experienced within the period
of distinct memory, only to be paralleled by experiences which are
forgotten. Perchance there are revolutions which create an interval
impassable to the memory.

With reference to the near past, we all occupy the region of common
sense, but in the prospect of the future we are, by instinct,
transcendentalists.

We affirm that all things are possible, but only these things have
been to our knowledge. I do not even infer the future _from what I
know of the past_. I am hardly better acquainted with the past than
with the future. What is new to the individual may be familiar to the
experience of his race. It must be rare indeed that the experience
of the individual transcends that of his race. It will be perceived
that there are two kinds of change,—that of the race, and that of the
individual within the limits of the former.

       *       *       *       *       *

One of those gentle, straight-down rainy days, when the rain begins
by spotting the cultivated fields as if shaken from a pepper-box; a
fishing day, when I see one neighbor after another, having donned his
oil-cloth suit, walking or riding past with a fish-pole, having struck
work,—a day and an employment to make philosophers of them all.

       *       *       *       *       *

When introduced to high life I cannot help perceiving how it is as a
thing jumped at, and I find that I do not get on in my enjoyment of
the fine arts which adorn it, because my attention is wholly occupied
with the jump, remembering that the greatest genuine leap on record,
due to human muscles alone, is that of certain wandering Arabs who
cleared twenty-five feet on level ground. The first question which I
am tempted to put to the proprietor of such great impropriety is, “Who
boosts you?” Are you one of the ninety-nine who fail or the hundredth,
who succeeds?


_June 8. Sunday._ In F. A. Michaux’s, _i. e._ the younger Michaux’s,
“Voyage à l’ouest des Monts Alléghanys, 1802,” printed at Paris, 1808:—

He says the common inquiry in the newly settled West was, “‘From what
part of the world have you come?’ As if these vast and fertile regions
would naturally be the point of union (_réunion_, meeting) and the
common country of all the inhabitants of the globe.”[193]

The current of the Ohio is so swift in the spring that it is not
necessary to row. Indeed rowing would do more harm than good, since
it would tend to turn the ark out of the current on to some isle or
sand-bar, where it would be entangled amid floating trees. This has
determined the form of the bateaux, which are not the best calculated
for swiftness but to obey the current. They are from fifteen to fifty
feet long by ten to twelve and fifteen, with square ends, and roof of
boards like a house at one end. The sides are about four and a half
feet above the water. “I was alone on the shore of the Monongahela,
when I perceived, for the first time, in the distance, five or six of
these bateaux which were descending this river. I could not conceive
what those great square boxes were, which, abandoned to the current,
presented alternately their ends, their sides, and even (or also (?),
_et même_) their angles. As they came nearer, I heard a confused noise
but without distinguishing anything, on account of the elevation of the
sides. It was only on ascending the bank of the river that I perceived,
in these bateaux, many families carrying with them their horses, cows,
poultry, dismounted carts (_charrettes_), plows, harnesses, beds,
agricultural implements, in short all that constitute the movables of a
household (_ménage_) and the carrying on (_exploitation_) of a farm.”
But he was obliged to paddle his log canoe “_sans cesse_” because of
the sluggishness of the current of the Ohio in April, 1802.

A Vermonter told him that the expense of clearing land in his State
was always defrayed by the potash obtained from the ashes of the trees
which were burnt, and sometimes people took land to clear on condition
that they should have what potash they could make.

After travelling more than three thousand miles in North America, he
says that no part is to be compared for the “_force végétative des
forêts_” to the region of the Ohio between Wheeling and Marietta.
Thirty-six miles above the last place he measured a plane tree
on the bank of the Ohio which, at four feet from the ground, was
forty-seven in circumference. It is true it was “_renflé d’une manière
prodigieuse_.” Tulip and plane trees, his father had said, attained the
greatest diameter of North American trees.

Ginseng was then the only “territorial” production of Kentucky which
would pay the expense of transportation _by land_ to Philadelphia. They
collected it from spring to the first frosts. Even hunters carried
for this purpose, beside their guns, a bag and a little “_pioche_.”
From twenty-five to thirty “_milliers pesant_” were then transported
annually, and this commerce was on the increase. Some transported it
themselves from Kentucky to China, _i. e._ without selling it [to]
the merchants of the seaboard. Traders in Kentucky gave twenty to
twenty-four “sous” the pound for it.

They habituated their wild hogs to return to the house from time to
time by distributing corn for them once or twice a week. So I read that
in Buenos Ayres they collect the horses into the corral twice a week to
keep them tame in a degree.

       *       *       *       *       *

Gathered the first strawberries to-day.

Observed on Fair Haven a tall pitch pine, such as some call yellow
pine,—very smooth, yellowish, and destitute of branches to a great
height. The outer and darker-colored bark appeared to have scaled
off, leaving a fresh and smooth surface. At the ground, all round the
tree, I saw what appeared to be the edges of the old surface scales,
extending to two inches more in thickness. The bark was divided into
large, smooth plates, one to two feet long and four to six inches wide.

I noticed that the cellular portion of the bark of the canoe birch
log from which I stripped the epidermis a week or two ago was turned
a complete brick-red color very striking to behold and reminding
me of the red man and all strong, natural things,—the color of our
blood somewhat. Under the epidermis it was still a sort of buff. The
different colors of the various parts of this bark, at various times,
fresh or stale, are extremely agreeable to my eye.

I found the white-pine-top full of staminate blossom-buds not yet fully
grown or expanded, with a rich red tint like a tree full of fruit, but
I could find no pistillate blossom.

The fugacious-petalled cistus, and the pink, and the lupines of various
tints are seen together.

Our outside garments, which are often thin and fanciful and merely for
show, are our epidermis, hanging loose and fantastic like that of the
yellow birch, which may be cast off without harm, stripped off here and
there without fatal injury; sometimes called cuticle and false skin.
The vital principle wholly wanting in it; partakes not of the life of
the plant. Our thicker and more essential garments are our cellular
integument. When this is removed, the tree is said to be girdled and
dies. Our shirt is the cortex, liber, or true bark, beneath which
is found the alburnum or sap-wood, while the heart in old stocks is
commonly rotten or has disappeared. As if we grew like trees, and were
of the exogenous kind.


_June 9._ James Wood, Senior, told me to-day that Asa (?) Melvin’s
father told him that he had seen alewives caught (many of them) in the
meadow which we were crossing, on the west of Bateman’s Pond, where now
there is no stream, and though it is wet you can walk everywhere; also
one shad. He thinks that a great part of the meadow once belonged to
the pond.

Gathered the _Linnæa borealis_.


_June 11. Wednesday._ Last night a beautiful summer night, not too
warm, moon not quite full, after two or three rainy days. Walked to
Fair Haven by railroad, returning by Potter’s pasture and Sudbury
road. I feared at first that there would be too much white light,
like the pale remains of daylight, and not a yellow, gloomy, dreamier
light; that it would be like a candlelight by day; but when I got
away from the town and deeper into the night, it was better. I hear
whip-poor-wills, and see a few fireflies in the meadow.

I saw by the shadows cast by the inequalities of the clayey sand-bank
in the Deep Cut that it was necessary to see objects by moonlight
as well as sunlight, to get a complete notion of them. This bank had
looked much more flat by day, when the light was stronger, but now the
heavy shadows revealed its prominences. The prominences are light, made
more remarkable by the dark shadows which they cast.

When I rose out of the Deep Cut into the old pigeon-place field, I rose
into a warmer stratum of air, it being lighter. It told of the day, of
sunny noontide hours,—an air in which work had been done, which men had
breathed. It still remembered the sunny banks,—of the laborer wiping
his brow, of the bee humming amid flowers, the hum of insects. Here is
a puff of warmer air which has taken its station on the hills; which
has come up from the sultry plains of noon.[194]

I hear the nighthawks uttering their squeaking notes high in the air
now at nine o’clock P. M., and occasionally—what I do not remember to
have heard so late—their booming note. It sounds more as if under a
cope than by day. The sound is not so fugacious, going off to be lost
amid the spheres, but is echoed hollowly to earth, making the low roof
of heaven vibrate. Such a sound is more confused and dissipated by day.

The whip-poor-will suggests how wide asunder [are] the woods and the
town. Its note is very rarely heard by those who live on the street,
and then it is thought to be of ill omen. Only the dwellers on the
outskirts of the village hear it occasionally. It sometimes comes into
their yards. But go into the woods in a warm night at this season, and
it is the prevailing sound. I hear now five or six at once. It is no
more of ill omen therefore here than the night and the moonlight are.
It is a bird not only of the woods, but of the night side of the woods.

New beings have usurped the air we breathe, rounding Nature, filling
her crevices with sound. To sleep where you may hear the whip-poor-will
in your dreams!

I hear from this upland, from which I see Wachusett by day, a wagon
crossing one of the bridges. I have no doubt that in some places
to-night I should be sure to hear every carriage which crossed a bridge
over the river within the limits of Concord, for in such an hour and
atmosphere the sense of hearing is wonderfully assisted and asserts
a new dignity, and [we] become the Hearalls of the story. The late
traveller cannot drive his horse across the distant bridge, but this
still and resonant atmosphere tells the tale to my ear. Circumstances
are very favorable to the transmission of such a sound. In the first
place, planks so placed and struck like a bell swung near the earth
emit a very resonant and penetrating sound; add that the bell is, in
this instance, hung over water, and that the night air, not only on
account of its stillness, but perhaps on account of its density, is
more favorable to the transmission of sound. If the whole town were a
raised planked floor, what a din there would be!

I hear some whip-poor-wills on hills, others in thick wooded vales,
which ring hollow and cavernous, like an apartment or cellar, with
their note. As when I hear the working of some artisan from within an
apartment.

I now descend round the corner of the grain-field, through the pitch
pine wood into a lower field, more inclosed by woods, and find myself
in a colder, damp and misty atmosphere, with much dew on the grass. I
seem to be nearer to the origin of things. There is something creative
and primal in the cool mist. This dewy mist does not fail to suggest
music to me, unaccountably; fertility, the origin of things. An
atmosphere which has forgotten the sun, where the ancient principle of
moisture prevails. It is laden with the condensed fragrance of plants
and, as it were, distilled in dews.

The woodland paths are never seen to such advantage as in a moonlight
night, so embowered, still opening before you almost against
expectation as you walk; you are so completely in the woods, and yet
your feet meet no obstacles. It is as if it were not a path, but an
open, winding passage through the bushes, which your feet find.

Now I go by the spring, and when I have risen to the same level as
before, find myself in the warm stratum again.

The woods are about as destitute of inhabitants at night as the
streets. In both there will be some night-walkers. There are but few
wild creatures to seek their prey. The greater part of its inhabitants
have retired to rest.

Ah, that life that I have known! How hard it is to remember what is
most memorable! We remember how we itched, not how our hearts beat.
I can sometimes recall to mind the quality, the immortality, of my
youthful life, but in memory is the only relation to it.

The very cows have now left their pastures and are driven home to their
yards. I meet no creature in the fields.

I hear the night-warbler[195] breaking out as in his dreams, made so
from the first for some mysterious reason.

Our spiritual side takes a more distinct form, like our shadow which we
see accompanying us.

I do not know but I feel less vigor at night; my legs will not
carry me so far; as if the night were less favorable to muscular
exertion,—weakened us, somewhat as darkness turns plants pale. But
perhaps my experience is to be referred to being already exhausted by
the day, and I have never tried the experiment fairly. Yet sometimes
after a hard day’s work I have found myself unexpectedly vigorous. It
was so hot summer before last that the Irish laborers on the railroad
worked by night instead of day for a while, several of them having
been killed by the heat and cold water. I do not know but they did as
much work as ever by day. Yet methinks Nature would not smile on such
labors.

Only the Hunter’s and Harvest moons are famous, but I think that each
full moon deserves to be and has its own character well marked. One
might be called the Midsummer-Night Moon.

The wind and water are still awake. At night you are sure to hear
what wind there is stirring. The wind blows, the river flows, without
resting. There lies Fair Haven Lake, undistinguishable from fallen sky.
The pines seem forever foreign, at least to the civilized man,—not only
their aspect but their scent, and their turpentine.

So still and moderate is the night! No scream is heard, whether of fear
or joy. No great comedy nor tragedy is being enacted. The chirping of
crickets is the most universal, if not the loudest, sound. There is no
French Revolution in Nature, no excess. She is warmer or colder by a
degree or two.

By night no flowers, at least no variety of colors. The pinks are no
longer pink; they only shine faintly, reflecting more light. Instead of
flowers underfoot, stars overhead.

My shadow has the distinctness of a second person, a certain black
companion bordering on the imp, and I ask, “Who is this?” which I see
dodging behind me as I am about to sit down on a rock.

No one, to my knowledge, has observed the minute differences in the
seasons. Hardly two nights are alike. The rocks do not feel warm
to-night, for the air is warmest; nor does the sand particularly. A
book of the seasons, each page of which should be written in its own
season and out-of-doors, or in its own locality wherever it may be.

When you get into the road, though far from the town, and feel the sand
under your feet, it is as if you had reached your own gravel walk. You
no longer hear the whip-poor-will, nor regard your shadow, for here you
expect a fellow-traveller. You catch yourself walking merely. The road
leads your steps and thoughts alike to the town. You see only the path,
and your thoughts wander from the objects which are presented to your
senses. You are no longer in place. It is like conformity,—walking in
the ways of men.

In Charles Darwin’s “Voyage of a Naturalist round the World,” commenced
in 1831:—

He gave to Ehrenberg some of an impalpably fine dust which filled the
air at sea near the Cape de Verd Islands, and he found it to consist in
great part of “infusoria with siliceous shields, and of the siliceous
tissue of plants;” found in this sixty-seven different organic forms.
The infusoria with two exceptions inhabitants of fresh water. Vessels
have even run on shore owing to the obscurity. Is seen a thousand miles
from Africa. Darwin found particles of stone above a thousandth of an
inch square.

Speaking of St. Paul’s Rocks, Lat. 58´ N., Long. 29° 15´ W., “Not
a single plant, not even a lichen, grows on this islet; yet it is
inhabited by several insects and spiders. The following list completes,
I believe, the terrestrial fauna: a fly (Olfersia) living on the booby,
and a tick which must have come here as a parasite on the birds; a
small brown moth, belonging to a genus that feeds on feathers; a beetle
(Quedius), and a woodlouse from beneath the dung; and lastly numerous
spiders, which I suppose prey on these small attendants and scavengers
of the waterfowl. The often-repeated description of the stately palm
and other noble tropical plants, then birds, and lastly man, taking
possession of the coral islets as soon as formed, in the Pacific,
is probably not quite correct; I fear it destroys the poetry of this
story, that feather and dirt-feeding and parasitic insects and spiders
should be the first inhabitants of newly-formed oceanic land.”

At Bahia or San Salvador, Brazil, took shelter under a tree “so thick
that it would never have been penetrated by common English rain,” but
not so there.

Of a partridge near the mouth of the Plata, “A man on horseback,
by riding round and round in a circle, or rather in a spire, so as
to approach closer each time, may knock on the head as many as he
pleases.” Refers to Hearne’s Journey, page 383, for “In Arctic North
America the Indians catch the Varying Hare by walking spirally round
and round it, when on its form: the middle of the day is reckoned the
best time, when the sun is high, and the shadow of the hunter not very
long.”

In the same place, “General Rosas is also a perfect horseman—an
accomplishment of no small consequence in a country where an assembled
army elected its general by the following trial: A troop of unbroken
horses being driven into a corral, were let out through a gateway,
above which was a cross-bar: it was agreed whoever should drop from
the bar on one of these wild animals, as it rushed out, and should be
able, without saddle or bridle, not only to ride it, but also to bring
it back to the door of the corral, should be their general. The person
who succeeded was accordingly elected, and doubtless made a general fit
for such an army. This extraordinary feat has also been performed by
Rosas.”

Speaks of the Gaucho sharpening his knife on the back of the armadillo
before he kills him.

Alcide d’Orbigny, from 1825 to 1833 in South America, now (1846)
publishing the results on a scale which places him second to Humboldt
among South American travellers.

Hail in Buenos Ayres as large as small apples; killed thirteen deer,
beside ostriches, which last also it blinded, etc., etc. Dr. Malcomson
told him of hail in India, in 1831, which “much injured the cattle.”
Stones flat, one ten inches in circumference; passed through windows,
making round holes.

A difference in the country about Montevideo and somewhere else
attributed to the manuring and grazing of the cattle. Refers to Atwater
as saying that the same thing is observed in the prairies of North
America, “where coarse grass, between five and six feet high, when
grazed by cattle, changes into common pasture land.” (_Vide_ Atwater’s
words in Silliman’s _North American Journal_, vol. i, p. 117.)

I would like to read Azara’s Voyage.

Speaks[196] of the fennel and the cardoon (_Cynara cardunculus_),
introduced from Europe, now very common in those parts of South
America. The latter occurs now on both sides the Cordilleras across
the continent. In Banda Oriental alone “very many (probably several
hundred) square miles are covered by one mass of these prickly plants,
and are impenetrable by man or beast. Over the undulating plains, where
these great beds occur, nothing else can now live.... I doubt whether
any case is on record of an invasion on so grand a scale of one plant
over the aborigines.”

Horses first landed at the La Plata in 1535. Now these, with cattle
and sheep, have altered the whole aspect of the country,—vegetation,
etc. “The wild pig in some parts probably replaces the peccari; packs
of wild dogs may be heard howling on the wooded banks of the less
frequented streams; and the common cat, altered into a large and fierce
animal, inhabits rocky hills.”

At sea, eye being six feet above level, horizon is two and four fifths
miles distant. “In like manner, the more level the plain, the more
nearly does the horizon approach within these narrow limits; and this,
in my opinion, entirely destroys that grandeur which one would have
imagined that a vast level plain would have possessed.”

Darwin found a tooth of a _native horse_ contemporary with the
mastodon, on the Pampas of Buenos Ayres, though he says there is good
evidence against any horse living in America at the time of Columbus.
He speaks of their remains being common in North America. Owen has
found Darwin’s tooth similar to one Lyell brought from the United
States, but unlike any other, fossil or living, and named this American
horse _Equus curvidens_, from a slight but peculiar curvature in it.

The great table-land of southern Mexico makes the division between
North and South America with reference to the migration of animals.

Quotes Captain Owen’s “Surveying Voyage” for saying that, at the town
of Benguela on the west coast of Africa in a time of great drought,
a number of elephants entered in a body to possess themselves of
the wells. After a desperate conflict and the loss of one man, the
inhabitants—three thousand—drove them off. During a great drought in
India, says Dr. Malcomson, “a hare drank out of a vessel held by the
adjutant of the regiment.”

The guanacos (wild llama) and other animals of this genus have the
habit of dropping their dung from day to day in the same heap. The
Peruvian Indians use it for fuel, and are thus aided in collecting it.

Rowing up a stream which takes its rise in a mountain, you meet at
last with pebbles which have been washed down from it, when many miles
distant. I love to think of this kind of introduction to it.

The only quadruped native to the Falkland Islands is a large wolf-like
fox. As far as he is aware, “there is no other instance in any part of
the world of so small a mass of broken land, distant from a continent,
possessing so large an aboriginal quadruped peculiar to itself.”

In the Falkland Isles, where other fuel is scarce, they frequently cook
their beef with the bones from which the meat has been scraped. Also
they have “a green little bush about the size of common heath, which
has the useful property of burning while fresh and green.”

Saw a cormorant play with its fishy prey as a cat with a mouse,—eight
times let it go and dive after it again.

Seminal propagation produces a more original individual than that by
buds, layers, and grafts.

Some inhabitants of Tierra del Fuego having got some putrid whale’s
blubber in time of famine, “an old man cut off thin slices and
muttering over them, broiled them for a minute, and distributed them to
the famished party, who during this time preserved a profound silence.”
This was the only evidence of any religious worship among them. It
suggests that even the animals may have something divine in them and
akin to revelation,—some inspirations allying them to man as to God.

“Nor is it easy to teach them our superiority except by striking a
fatal blow. Like wild beasts, they do not appear to compare numbers;
for each individual, if attacked, instead of retiring, will endeavor
to dash your brains out with a stone, as certainly as a tiger under
similar circumstances would tear you.”

“We were well clothed, and though sitting close to the fire, were
far from too warm; yet these naked savages, though further off, were
observed, to our great surprise, to be streaming with perspiration at
undergoing such a roasting.”[197]

Ehrenberg examined some of the white paint with which the Fuegians
daub themselves, and found it to be composed of infusoria, including
fourteen polygastrica, and four phytolitharia, inhabitants of fresh
water, all old and known forms!!

Again of the Fuegians: “Simple circumstances—such as the beauty
of scarlet cloth or blue beads, the absence of women, our care in
washing ourselves—excited their admiration far more than any grand or
complicated object, such as our ship. Bougainville has well remarked
concerning these people, that they treat the ‘chef-d’œuvres de
l’industrie humaine, comme ils traitent les loix de la nature es ses
phénomènes.’”

He was informed of a tribe of foot Indians now changing into horse
Indians apparently in Patagonia.

“With the exception of a few berries, chiefly of a dwarf arbutus,
the natives [_i. e._ of Tierra del Fuego][198] eat no vegetable food
besides this fungus” (_Cyttaria Darwinii_). The “only country ... where
a cryptogamic plant affords a staple article of food.”

No reptiles in Tierra del Fuego nor in Falkland Islands.

Describes a species of kelp there,—_Macrocystis pyrifera_. “I know few
things more surprising than to see this plant growing and flourishing
amidst those great breakers of the Western Ocean, which no mass of
rock, let it be ever so hard, can long resist.... A few [stems][199]
taken together are sufficiently strong to support the weight of
the large loose stones to which, in the inland channels, they grow
attached; and yet some of these stones were so heavy that, when drawn
to the surface, they could scarcely be lifted into a boat by one
person.” Captain Cook thought that some of it grew to the length of
three hundred and sixty feet. “The beds of this sea-weed, even when
not of great breadth,” says D., “make excellent natural floating
breakwaters. It is quite curious to see, in an exposed harbor, how
soon the waves from the open sea, as they travel through the straggling
stems, sink in height, and pass into smooth water.”

Number of living creatures of all orders whose existence seems to
depend on the kelp; a volume might be written on them. If a forest were
destroyed anywhere, so many species would not perish as if this weed
were, and with the fish would go many birds and larger marine animals,
and hence the Fuegian himself perchance.

Tree ferns in Van Diemen’s Land (lat. 45°) six feet in circumference.

Missionaries encountered icebergs in Patagonia in latitude
corresponding to the Lake of Geneva, in a season corresponding to June
in Europe. In Europe, the most southern glacier which comes down to
the sea is on coast of Norway, latitude 67°,—20°, or 1230 [geographical
miles] nearer the pole.

Erratic boulders not observed in the intertropical parts of the world;
due to icebergs or glaciers.

Under soil perpetually frozen in North America in 56° at three feet; in
Siberia in 62° at twelve to fifteen feet.

In an excursion from Valparaiso to the base of the Andes: “We unsaddled
our horses near the spring, and prepared to pass the night. The evening
was fine, and the atmosphere so clear that the masts of the vessels
at anchor in the bay of Valparaiso, although no less than twenty-six
geographical miles distant, could be distinguished clearly as little
black streaks.” Anson had been surprised at the distance at which his
vessels were discovered from the coast without knowing the reason,—the
great height of the land and the transparency of the air.

Floating islands from four to six feet thick in Lake Tagua-tagua in
central Chile; blown about.


_June 12._ Listen to music religiously, as if it were the last strain
you might hear.[200]

There would be this advantage in travelling in your own country, even
in your own neighborhood, that you would be so thoroughly prepared to
understand what you saw you would make fewer travellers’ mistakes.

Is not he hospitable who entertains thoughts?


_June 13._ Walked to Walden last night (moon not quite full) by
railroad and upland wood-path, returning by Wayland road. Last full
moon the elms had not leaved out,—cast no heavy shadows,—and their
outlines were less striking and rich in the streets at night.

I noticed night before night before last from Fair Haven how valuable
was some water by moonlight, like the river and Fair Haven Pond, though
far away, reflecting the light with a faint glimmering sheen, as in the
spring of the year. The water shines with an inward light like a heaven
on earth. The silent depth and serenity and majesty of water! Strange
that men should distinguish gold and diamonds, when these precious
elements are so common. I saw a distant river by moonlight, making no
noise, yet flowing, as by day, still to the sea, like melted silver
reflecting the moonlight. Far away it lay encircling the earth. How far
away it may look in the night, and even from a low hill how miles away
down in the valley! As far off as paradise and the delectable country!
There is a certain glory attends on water by night. By it the heavens
are related to the earth, undistinguishable from a sky beneath you.
And I forgot to say that after I reached the road by Potter’s bars,—or
further, by Potter’s Brook,—I saw the moon suddenly reflected full from
a pool. A puddle from which you may see the moon reflected, and the
earth dissolved under your feet. The magical moon with attendant stars
suddenly looking up with mild lustre from a window in the dark earth.

I observed also the same night a halo about my shadow in the moonlight,
which I referred to the accidentally lighter color of the surrounding
surface; I transferred my shadow to the darkest patches of grass,
and saw the halo there equally. It serves to make the outlines of the
shadow more distinct.

But now for last night. A few fireflies in the meadow. Do they shine,
though invisibly, by day? Is their candle lighted by day? It is not
nightfall till the whip-poor-wills begin to sing.

As I entered the Deep Cut, I was affected by beholding the first faint
reflection of genuine and unmixed moonlight on the eastern sand-bank
while the horizon, yet red with day, was tingeing the western side.
What an interval between those two lights! The light of the moon,—in
what age of the world does that fall upon the earth? The moonlight was
as the earliest and dewy morning light, and the daylight tinge reminded
me much more of the night. There were the old and new dynasties
opposed, contrasted, and an interval between, which time could not
span. Then is night, when the daylight yields to the nightlight. It
suggested an interval, a distance not recognized in history. Nations
have flourished in that light.

When I had climbed the sand-bank on the left, I felt the warmer current
or stratum of air on my cheek, like a blast from a furnace.

The white stems of the pines, which reflected the weak light, standing
thick and close together while their lower branches were gone, reminded
me that the pines are only larger grasses which rise to a chaffy head,
and we the insects that crawl between them. They are particularly
grass-like.

How long do the gales retain the heat of the sun? I find them retreated
high up the sides of hills, especially on open fields or cleared
places. Does, perchance, any of this pregnant air survive the dews of
night? Can any of it be found remembering the sun of yesterday even in
the morning hours. Does, perchance, some puff, some blast, survive the
night on elevated clearings surrounded by the forest?

The bullfrog belongs to summer. The different frogs mark the
seasons pretty well,—the peeping hyla, the dreaming frog,[201] and
the bullfrog. I believe that all may be heard at last occasionally
together.

I heard partridges drumming to-night as late as 9 o’clock. What
singularly space penetrating and filling sound! Why am I never nearer
to its source?

We do not commonly live our life out and full; we do not fill all our
pores with our blood; we do not inspire and expire fully and entirely
enough, so that the wave, the comber, of each inspiration shall break
upon our extremest shores, rolling till it meets the sand which bounds
us, and the sound of the surf come back to us. Might not a bellows
assist us to breathe? That our breathing should create a wind in a
calm day! We live but a fraction of our life. Why do we not let on the
flood, raise the gates, and set all our wheels in motion? He that hath
ears to hear, let him hear. Employ your senses.

The newspapers tell us of news not to be named even with that in its
own kind which an observing man can pick up in a solitary walk, as if
it gained some importance and dignity by its publicness. Do we need to
be advertised each day that such is still the routine of life?[202]

The tree-toad’s, too, is a summer sound.

I hear, just as the night sets in, faint notes from time to time from
some sparrow (?) falling asleep,—a vesper hymn,—and later, in the
woods, the chuckling, rattling sound of some unseen bird on the near
trees. The nighthawk booms wide awake.

By moonlight we see not distinctly even the surface of the earth, but
our daylight experience supplies us with confidence.

As I approached the pond down Hubbard’s Path, after coming out of
the woods into a warmer air, I saw the shimmering of the moon on its
surface, and, in the near, now flooded cove, the water-bugs, darting,
circling about, made streaks or curves of light. The moon’s inverted
pyramid of shimmering light commenced about twenty rods off, like so
much micaceous sand. But I was startled to see midway in the dark water
a bright flamelike, more than phosphorescent light crowning the crests
of the wavelets, which at first I mistook for fireflies, and thought
even of cucullos.[203] It had the appearance of a pure, smokeless
flame a half-dozen inches long, issuing from the water and bending
flickeringly along its surface. I thought of St. Elmo’s lights and the
like. But, coming near to the shore of the pond itself, these flames
increased, and I saw that even this was so many broken reflections of
the moon’s disk, though one would have said they were of an intenser
light than the moon herself; from contrast with the surrounding water
they were. Standing up close to the shore and nearer the rippled
surface, I saw the reflections of the moon sliding down the watery
concave like so many lustrous burnished coins poured from a bag with
inexhaustible lavishness, and the lambent flames on the surface were
much multiplied, seeming to slide along a few inches with each wave
before they were extinguished; and I saw how farther and farther off
they gradually merged in the general sheen, which, in fact, was made
up of a myriad little mirrors reflecting the disk of the moon with
equal brightness to an eye rightly placed. The pyramid or sheaf of
light which we see springing from near where we stand only, in fact,
is the outline of that portion of the shimmering surface which an eye
takes in. To myriad eyes suitably placed, the whole surface of the pond
would be seen to shimmer, or rather it would be seen, as the waves
turned up their mirrors, to be covered with those bright flame-like
reflections of the moon’s disk, like a myriad candles everywhere
issuing from the waves; _i. e._ if there were as many eyes as angles
presented by the waves, the whole surface would appear as bright as
the moon; and these reflections are dispersed in all directions into
the atmosphere, flooding it with light. No wonder that water reveals
itself so far by night; even further in many states of the atmosphere
than by day. I thought at first it [was] some unusual phosphorescence.
In some positions these flames were star-like points, brighter than the
brightest stars. Suddenly a flame would show itself in a near and dark
space, precisely like some inflammable gas on the surface,—as if an
inflammable gas made its way up from the bottom.

I heard my old musical, simple-noted owl. The sound of the _dreaming_
frogs[204] prevails over the others. Occasionally a bullfrog near me
made an obscene noise, a sound like an eructation, near me. I think
they must be imbodied eructations. They suggest flatulency.

The pond is higher than ever, so as to hinder fishermen, and I could
hardly get to the true shore here on account of the bushes. I pushed
out in a boat a little and heard the chopping of the waves under its
bow. And on the bottom I saw the moving reflections of the shining
waves, faint streaks of light revealing the shadows of the waves or the
opaqueness of the water.

As I climbed the hill again toward my old bean-field, I listened to
the ancient, familiar, immortal, dear cricket sound under all others,
hearing at first some distinct chirps; but when these ceased I was
aware of the general earth-song, which my hearing had not heard, amid
which these were only taller flowers in a bed, and I wondered if behind
or beneath this there was not some other chant yet more universal. Why
do we not hear when this begins in the spring? and when it ceases in
the fall? Or is it too gradual?

After I have got into the road I have no thought to record all the way
home,—the walk is comparatively barren. The leafy elm sprays seem to
droop more by night (??).


_June 14. Saturday._ Full moon last night. Set out on a walk to
Conantum at 7 P. M. A serene evening, the sun going down behind clouds,
a few white or slightly shaded piles of clouds floating in the eastern
sky, but a broad, clear, mellow cope left for the moon to rise into.
An evening for poets to describe. Met a man driving home his cow from
pasture and stopping to chat with his neighbor; then a boy, who had
set down his pail in the road to stone a bird most perseveringly, whom
I heard afterward behind me telling his pail to be quiet in a tone of
assumed anger, because it squeaked under his arm. As I proceed along
the back road I hear the lark still singing in the meadow, and the
bobolink, and the gold robin on the elms, and the swallows twittering
about the barns. A small bird chasing a crow high in the air, who is
going home at night. All nature is in an expectant attitude. Before
Goodwin’s house, at the opening of the Sudbury road, the swallows
are diving at a tortoise-shell cat, who curvets and frisks rather
awkwardly, as if she did not know whether to be scared or not. And
now, having proceeded a little way down this road, the sun having
buried himself in the low cloud in the west and hung out his crimson
curtains,[205] I hear, while sitting by the wall, the sound of the
stake-driver at a distance,—like that made by a man pumping in a
neighboring farmyard, watering his cattle, or like chopping wood before
his door on a frosty morning,[206] and I can imagine like driving a
stake in a meadow. The pumper. I immediately went in search of the
bird, but, after going a third of a mile, it did not sound much nearer,
and the two parts of the sound did not appear to proceed from the same
place. What is the peculiarity of these sounds which penetrate so far
on the keynote of nature? At last I got near to the brook in the meadow
behind Hubbard’s wood, but I could not tell if [it] were further or
nearer than that. When I got within half a dozen rods of the brook, it
ceased, and I heard it no more. I suppose that I scared it. As before
I was further off than I thought, so now I was nearer than I thought.
It is not easy to understand how so small a creature can make so loud
a sound by merely sucking in or throwing out water with pump-like
lungs.[207] As yet no moon, but downy piles of cloud scattered here and
there in the expectant sky.

Saw a blue flag blossom in the meadow while waiting for the
stake-driver.

It was a sound as of gulping water.

Where my path crosses the brook in the meadow there is a singularly
sweet scent in the heavy air bathing the brakes, where the brakes
grow,—the fragrance of the earth, as if the dew were a distillation
of the fragrant essences of nature. When I reach the road, the farmer
going home from town invites me to ride in his high-set wagon, not
thinking why I walk, nor can I shortly explain. He remarks on the
coolness of the weather. The angelica is budded, a handsome luxuriant
plant. And now my senses are captivated again by a sweet fragrance as
I enter the embowered willow causeway, and I know not if it be from
a particular plant or all together,—sweet-scented vernal grass or
sweet-briar. Now the sun is fairly gone, I hear the dreaming frog,[208]
and the whip-poor-will from some _darker_ wood,—it is not far from
eight,—and the cuckoo. The song sparrows sing quite briskly among the
willows, as if it were spring again, and the blackbird’s harsher note
resounds over the meadows, and the veery’s comes up from the wood.
Fishes are dimpling the surface of the river, seizing the insects which
alight. A solitary fisherman in his boat inhabits the scene. As I rose
the hill beyond the bridge, I found myself in a cool, fragrant, dewy,
up-country, mountain morning air, a new region. (When I had issued from
the willows on to the bridge, it was like coming out of night into
twilight, the river reflected so much light.) The moon was now seen
rising over Fair Haven and at the same time reflected in the river,
pale and white like a silvery cloud, barred with a cloud, not promising
how it will shine anon. Now I meet an acquaintance coming from a remote
field in his hay-rigging, with a jag of wood; who reins up to show me
how large a woodchuck he has killed, which he found eating his clover.
But now he must drive on, for behind comes a boy taking up the whole
road with a huge roller drawn by a horse, which goes lumbering and
bouncing along, getting out of the way of night,—while the sun has gone
the other way,—and making such a noise as if it had the contents of
a tinker’s shop in its bowels, and rolls the whole road smooth like a
newly sown grain-field.

In Conant’s orchard I hear the faint cricket-like song of a sparrow
saying its vespers, as if it were a link between the cricket and the
bird. The robin sings now, though the moon shines silverly, and the
veery jingles its trill. I hear the fresh and refreshing sound of
falling water, as I have heard it in New Hampshire. It is a sound we do
not commonly hear. I see that the whiteweed is in blossom, which, as I
had not walked by day for some time, I had not seen before.

How moderate, deliberate, is Nature! How gradually the shades of night
gather and deepen, giving man ample leisure to bid farewell to-day,
conclude his day’s affairs, and prepare for slumber! The twilight seems
out of proportion to the length of the day. Perchance it saves our
eyes. Now for some hours the farmers have been getting home.

Since the alarm about mad dogs a couple of years ago there are
comparatively few left to bark at the traveller and bay the moon. All
nature is abandoned to me.

You feel yourself—your body, your legs,—more at night, for there
is less beside to be distinctly known, and hence perhaps you think
yourself more tired than you are. I see indistinctly oxen asleep in
the fields, silent in majestic slumber, like the sphinx,—statuesque,
Egyptian, reclining. What solid rest! How their heads are supported!
A sparrow or a cricket makes more noise. From Conant’s summit I hear
as many as fifteen whip-poor-wills—or whip-or-I-wills—at once, the
succeeding cluck sounding strangely foreign, like a hewer at work
elsewhere.

The moon is accumulating yellow light and triumphing over the clouds,
but still the west is suffused here and there with a slight red tinge,
marking the path of the day. Though inexperienced ones might call it
night, it is not yet. Dark, heavy clouds lie along the western horizon,
exhibiting the forms of animals and men, while the moon is behind
a cloud. Why do we detect these forms so readily?—whales or giants
reclining, busts of heroes, Michael-Angelic. There is the gallery of
statuary, the picture gallery of man,—not a board upon an Italian’s
head, but these dark figures along the horizon,—the board some Titan
carries on his head. What firm and heavy outlines for such soft and
light material!

How sweet and encouraging it is to hear the sound of some artificial
music from the midst of woods or from the top of a hill at night, borne
on the breeze from some distant farmhouse,—the human voice or a flute!
That is a civilization one can endure, worth having. I could go about
the world listening for the strains of music. Men use this gift but
sparingly, methinks. What should we think of a bird which had the gift
of song but used it only once in a dozen years, like the tree which
blossoms only once in a century?

Now the dorbug comes humming by, the first I have heard this year. In
three months it will be the Harvest Moon. I cannot easily believe it.
Why not call this the Traveller’s Moon? It would be as true to call
the last (the May) the Planter’s Moon as it is to call September’s the
Harvest Moon, for the farmers use one about as little as the other.
Perhaps this is the Whip-poor-will’s Moon. The bullfrog now, which I
have not heard before, this evening. It is nearly nine. They are much
less common and their note more intermittent than that of the dreamers.
I scared up a bird on a _low_ bush, perchance on its nest. It is rare
that you start them at night from such places.

Peabody says that the nighthawk retires to rest about the time the
whip-poor-will begins its song. The whip-poor-will begins now at
7.30. I hear the nighthawk after 9 o’clock. He says it flies low in
the evening, but it also flies high, as it must needs do to make the
booming sound.

I hear the lowing of cows occasionally, and the barking of dogs.
The pond by moonlight, which may make the object in a walk, suggests
little to be said. Where there was only one firefly in a dozen rods, I
hastily ran to one which had crawled up to the top of a grass-head and
exhibited its light, and instantly another sailed in to it, showing
its light also; but my presence made them extinguish their lights.
The latter retreated, and the former crawled slowly down the stem.
It appeared to me that the first was a female who thus revealed her
place to the male, who was also making known his neighborhood as he
hovered about, both showing their lights that they might come together.
It was like a mistress who had climbed to the turrets of her castle
and exhibited there a blazing taper for a signal, while her lover
had displayed his light on the plain. If perchance she might have any
lovers abroad.

Not much before 10 o’clock does the moonlight night begin. When man is
asleep and day fairly forgotten, then is the beauty of moonlight seen
over lonely pastures where cattle are silently feeding.[209] Then let
me walk in a diversified country, of hill and dale, with heavy woods
one side, and copses and scattered trees and bushes enough to give me
shadows. Returning, a mist is on the river. The river is taken into the
womb of Nature again.

Now is the clover month, but haying is not yet begun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Evening.—Went to Nawshawtuct by North Branch.

Overtaken by a slight shower. The same increased fragrance from the
ground—sweet-fern, etc.—as in the night, and for the like reason
probably. The houstonias still blossom freshly, as I believe they
continue to do all summer. The fever-root in blossom; pictured in
Bigelow’s “Medical Botany.” _Triosteum perfoliatum_, near the top of
Hill, under the wall, looks somewhat like a milkweed. The _Viburnum
dentatum_, very regularly toothed, just ready to blossom; sometimes
called arrow-wood.

Nature seems not [to] have designed that man should be much abroad by
night, and in the moon proportioned the light fitly. By the faintness
and rareness of the light compared with that of the sun, she expresses
her intention with regard to him.


_June 15. Sunday._ Darwin still:—

Finds runaway sailors on the Chonos Archipelago, who he thought “had
kept a very good reckoning of time,” having lost only four days in
fifteen months.

Near same place, on the islands of the archipelago, he found wild
potato, the tallest four feet high, tubers generally small but one two
inches in diameter; “resembled in every respect, and had the same smell
as English potatoes; but when boiled they shrunk much, and were watery
and insipid, without any bitter taste.”

Speaking of the surf on the coast of Chiloe, “I was assured that,
after a heavy gale, the roar can be heard at night even at Castro,
a distance of no less than twenty-one sea-miles, across a hilly and
wooded country.”

Subsidence and elevation of the west coast of South America and of the
Cordilleras. “Daily it is forced home on the mind of the geologist,
that nothing, not even the wind that blows, is so unstable as the level
of the crust of this earth.”

Would like to see Sir Francis Head’s travels in South America,—Pampas
perhaps.[210] Also Chambers’ “Sea Levels.” Also travels of Spix and Von
Martius.

It is said that hydrophobia was first known in South America in 1803.

At the Galapagos, the tortoises going to any place travel night and day
and so get there sooner than would be expected,—about eight miles in
two or three days. He rode on their backs.

The productions of the Galapagos Archipelago, from five to six hundred
miles from America, are still of the American type. “It was most
striking to be surrounded by new birds, new reptiles, new shells,
new insects, new plants, and yet, by innumerable trifling details of
structure, and even by the tones of voice and plumage of the birds,
to have the temperate plains of Patagonia, or the hot, dry deserts of
Northern Chile, vividly brought before my eyes.” What is most singular,
not only are the plants, etc., to a great extent peculiar to these
islands, but each for the most part has its own kinds, though they are
within sight of each other.

Birds so tame that they can be killed with a stick. _I_ would suggest
that, from having dealt so long with the inoffensive and slow-moulded
tortoise, they have not yet acquired an instinctive fear of man, who is
a new-comer. Methinks tortoises, lizards, etc., for wild creatures are
remarkable for the nearness to which man approaches them and handles
them, as logs,—cold-blooded, lumpish forms of life,—only taking care
not to step into their mouths. An alligator has been known to have come
out of the mud like a mud volcano where was now the floor of a native’s
hut.

“The common dock is ... widely disseminated, [in New Zealand][211] and
will, I fear, forever remain a proof of the rascality of an Englishman,
who sold the seeds for those of the tobacco plant.”

The New-Hollanders a little higher in the scale of civilization than
the Fuegians.

Puzzled by a “well rounded fragment of greenstone, rather larger than
a man’s head,” which a captain had found on a small coral circle or
atoll near Keeling Island, “where every other particle of matter is
calcareous,” about six hundred miles from Sumatra. D. agrees with
Kotzebue (_vide_ Kotzebue) who states that (Darwin’s words) “the
inhabitants of the Radack Archipelago, a group of lagoon-islands in the
midst of the Pacific, obtained stones for sharpening their instruments
by searching the roots of trees which are cast upon the beach,” and
“laws have been established that such stones belong to the chief, and
a punishment is inflicted on any one who attempts to steal them.” Let
geologists look out. “Some natives carried by Kotzebue to Kamtschatka
collected stones to take back to their country.”

Found no bottom at 7200 feet, and 2200 yards from shore of Keeling
Island, a coral isle.

His theory of the formation of coral isles by the subsidence of the
land appears probable. He concludes that “the great continents are,
for the most part, rising areas; and ... the central parts of the great
oceans are sinking areas.”

Not a _private_ person on the island of Ascension; the inhabitants are
paid and victualled by the British government. Springs, cisterns, etc.,
are managed by the same. “Indeed, the whole island may be compared to
a huge ship kept in first-rate order.”

_Vide_ “Circumnavigation of Globe up to Cook.”

_Vide_ “Voyages Round the World since Cook.”

       *       *       *       *       *

The author of the article on Orchids in the _Eclectic_ says that “a
single plant produced three different flowers of genera previously
supposed to be quite distinct.”

Saw the first wild rose to-day on the west side of the railroad
causeway. The whiteweed has suddenly appeared, and the clover gives
whole fields a rich and florid appearance,—the rich red and the
sweet-scented white. The fields are blushing with the red species as
the western sky at evening. The blue-eyed grass, well named, looks up
to heaven. And the yarrow, with its persistent dry stalks and heads,
is now ready to blossom again. The dry stems and heads of last year’s
tansy stand high above the new green leaves.

I sit in the shade of the pines to hear a wood thrush at noon. The
ground smells of dry leaves; the heat is oppressive. The bird begins
on a low strain, _i. e._ it first delivers a strain on a lower key,
then a moment after another a little higher, then another still varied
from the others,—no two successive strains alike, but either ascending
or descending. He confines himself to his few notes, in which he is
unrivalled, as if his kind had learned this and no more anciently.

I perceive, as formerly, a white froth dripping from the pitch pines,
just at the base of the new shoots. It has no taste. The pollywogs in
the pond are now full-tailed. The hickory leaves are blackened by a
recent frost, which reminds me that this is near their northern limit.

It is remarkable the rapidity with which the grass grows. The 25th of
May I walked to the hills in Wayland, and when I returned across lots
do not remember that I had much occasion to think of the grass, or to
go round any fields to avoid treading on it; but just a week afterward,
at Worcester, it was high and waving in the fields, and I was to
some extent confined to the road; and the same was the case here.
Apparently in one month you get from fields which you can cross without
hesitation, to haying time. It has grown you hardly know when, be the
weather what it may, sunshine or storm. I start up a solitary woodcock
in the shade, in some copse; goes off with a startled, rattling,
hurried note.

After walking by night several times I now walk by day, but I am not
aware of any crowning advantage in it. I see small objects better, but
it does not enlighten me any. The day is more trivial.

What a careful gardener Nature is! She does not let the sun come out
suddenly with all his intensity after rain and cloudy weather, but
graduates the change to suit the tenderness of plants.

I see the tall crowfoot now in the meadows (_Ranunculus acris_), with
a smooth stem. I do not notice the _bulbosus_, which was so common a
fortnight ago. The rose-colored flowers of the _Kalmia angustifolia_,
lambkill, just opened and opening. The _Convallaria bifolia_ growing
stale in the woods. The _Hieracium venosum_, veiny-leaved hawkweed,
with its yellow blossoms in the woodland path. The _Hypoxis erecta_,
yellow Bethlehem-star, where there is a thick, wiry grass in open
paths; should be called yellow-eyed grass, methinks. The _Pyrola
asarifolia_, with its pagoda-like stem of flowers, _i. e_. broad-leaved
wintergreen. The _Trientalis Americana_, like last, in the woods, with
its star-like white flower and pointed whorled leaves. The prunella too
is in blossom, and the rather delicate _Thesium umbellatum_, a white
flower. The Solomon’s-seal, with a greenish drooping raceme of flowers
at the top, I do not identify.

I notice to-day the same remarkable bushy growth on the fir (in
Wheildon’s garden) that I have noticed on the pines and cedars. The
leaves are not so thickly set and are much stiffer.

I find that I postpone all actual intercourse with my friends to
a certain real intercourse which takes place commonly when we are
actually at a distance from one another.


_June 22. Sunday._ Is the shrub with yellow blossoms which I found last
week near the Lincoln road while surveying for E. Hosmer and thought to
be _Xylosteum ciliatum_, or fly honeysuckle, the same with the yellow
diervilla which I find in Laurel Glen to-day?

The birch is the surveyor’s tree. It makes the best stakes to look
at through the sights of a compass, except when there is snow on the
ground. Their white bark was not made in vain. In surveying wood-lots
I have frequent occasion to say this is what they were made for.

I see that Dugan has trimmed off and peeled the limbs of the willows on
the Turnpike to sell at the Acton powder-mill. I believe they get eight
dollars a cord for this wood.

I. Hapgood of Acton got me last Friday to compare the level of
his cellar-bottom with his garden, for, as he says, when Robbins &
Wetherbee keep the water of Nashoba Brook back so as to flood his
garden, it comes into his cellar. I found that part of the garden five
inches lower than the cellar-bottom. Men are affected in various ways
by the actions of others. If a man far away builds a dam, I have water
in my cellar. He said that the water was sometimes a foot deep in the
garden.

We are enabled to criticise others only when we are different from, and
in a given particular superior to, them ourselves. By our aloofness
from men and their affairs we are enabled to overlook and criticise
them. There are but few men who stand on the hills by the roadside.
I am sane only when I have risen above my common sense, when I do
not take the foolish view of things which is commonly taken, when
I do not live for the low ends for which men commonly live. Wisdom
is not common. To what purpose have I senses, if I am thus absorbed
in affairs? My pulse must beat with Nature. After a hard day’s work
without a thought, turning my very brain into a mere tool, only in
the quiet of evening do I so far recover my senses as to hear the
cricket, which in fact has been chirping all day. In my better hours I
am conscious of the influx of a serene and unquestionable wisdom which
partly unfits, and if I yielded to it more rememberingly would wholly
unfit me, for what is called the active business of life, for that
furnishes nothing on which the eye of reason can rest. What is that
other kind of life to which I am thus continually allured? which alone
I love? Is it a life for this world? Can a man feed and clothe himself
gloriously who keeps only the truth steadily before him? who calls in
no evil to his aid? Are there duties which necessarily interfere with
the serene perception of truth? Are our serene moments mere foretastes
of heaven,—joys gratuitously vouchsafed to us as a consolation,—or
simply a transient realization of what might be the whole tenor of our
lives?

To be calm, to be serene! There is the calmness of the lake when there
is not a breath of wind; there is the calmness of a stagnant ditch.
So is it with us. Sometimes we are clarified and calmed healthily,
as we never were before in our lives, not by an opiate, but by some
unconscious obedience to the all-just laws, so that we become like
a still lake of purest crystal and without an effort our depths are
revealed to ourselves. All the world goes by us and is reflected in our
deeps. Such clarity! obtained by such pure means! by simple living, by
honesty of purpose. We live and rejoice. I awoke into a music which no
one about me heard. Whom shall I thank for it? The luxury of wisdom!
the luxury of virtue! Are there any intemperate in these things? I
feel my Maker blessing me. To the sane man the world is a musical
instrument. The very touch affords an exquisite pleasure.

As I walk the railroad causeway, I notice that the fields and meadows
have acquired various tinges as the season advances, the sun gradually
using all his paints. There is the rosaceous evening red tinge of red
clover,—like an evening sky gone down upon the grass,—the whiteweed
tinge, the white clover tinge, which reminds me how sweet it smells.
The tall buttercup stars the meadow on another side, telling of the
wealth of dairies. The blue-eyed grass, so beautiful near at hand,
imparts a kind of slate or clay blue tinge to the meads.

It is hot noon. The white pines are covered with froth at the base
of the new shoots, as I noticed the pitch pines were a week ago; as
if they perspired. I am threading an open pitch and white pine wood,
easily traversed, where the pine-needles redden all the ground, which
is as smooth as a carpet. Still the blackberries love to creep over
this floor, for it is not many years since this was a blackberry-field.
And I hear around me, but never in sight, the many wood thrushes
whetting their steel-like notes. Such keen singers! It takes a fiery
heat, many dry pine leaves added to the furnace of the sun, to temper
their strains! Always they are either rising or falling to a new
strain. After what a moderate pause they deliver themselves again!
saying ever a new thing, avoiding repetition, methinks answering one
another. While most other birds take their siesta, the wood thrush
discharges his song. It is delivered like a bolas, or a piece of
jingling steel.

The domestic ox has his horns tipped with brass. This and his shoes
are the badges of servitude which he wears; as if he would soon get to
jacket and trousers. I am singularly affected when I look over a herd
of reclining oxen in their pasture, and find that every one has these
brazen balls on his horns. They are partly humanized so. It is not pure
brute; there is art added. Where are these balls sold? Who is their
maker? The bull has a ring in his nose.

The _Lysimachia quadrifolia_ exhibits its small yellow blossoms now in
the wood-path. Butter-and-eggs has blossomed. The _Uvularia vulgaris_,
or bladderwort, a yellow pea-like flower, has blossomed in stagnant
pools.


_June 23._ It is a pleasant sound to me, the squeaking and the booming
of nighthawks flying over high open fields in the woods. They fly like
butterflies, not to avoid birds of prey but, apparently, to secure
their own insect prey. There is a particular part of the railroad just
below the shanty where they may be heard and seen in greatest numbers.
But often you must look a long while before you can detect the mote in
the sky from which the note proceeds.

The common cinquefoil (_Potentilla simplex_) greets me with its
simple and unobtrusive yellow flower in the grass. The _P. argentea_,
hoary cinquefoil, also is now in blossom. _P. sarmentosa_, running
cinquefoil, we had common enough in the spring.


_June 26. Thursday._ The slight reddish-topped grass (red-top?) now
gives a reddish tinge to some fields, like sorrel.

Visited a menagerie this afternoon. I am always surprised to see the
same spots and stripes on wild beasts from Africa and Asia and also
from South America,—on the Brazilian tiger and the African leopard,—and
their general similarity. All these wild animals—lions, tigers,
chetas, leopards, etc.—have one hue,—tawny and commonly spotted or
striped,—what you may call pard-color, a color and marking which I had
not associated with America. These are wild beasts. What constitutes
the difference between a wild beast and a tame one? How much more human
the one than the other! Growling, scratching, roaring, with whatever
beauty and gracefulness, still untamable, this royal Bengal tiger or
this leopard. They have the character and the importance of another
order of men. The majestic lion, the king of beasts,—he must retain his
title.

I was struck by the gem-like, changeable, greenish reflections from
the eyes of the grizzly bear, so glassy that you never saw the surface
of the eye. They [were] quite demonic. Its claws, though extremely
large and long, look weak and made for digging or pawing the earth and
leaves. It is unavoidable, the idea of transmigration; not merely a
fancy of the poets, but an instinct of the race.


_June 29._ There is a great deal of white clover this year. In many
fields where there has been no clover seed sown for many years at
least, it is more abundant than the red, and the heads are nearly as
large. Also pastures which are close cropped, and where I think there
was little or no clover last year, are spotted white with a humbler
growth. And everywhere, by roadsides, garden borders, etc., even
where the sward is trodden hard, the small white heads on short stems
are sprinkled everywhere. As this is the season for the swarming of
bees, and this clover is very attractive to them, it is probably the
more difficult to secure them; at any rate it is the more important
to secure their services now that they can make honey so fast. It is
an interesting inquiry why this year is so favorable to the growth of
clover!

I am interested to observe how old-country methods of farming resources
are introduced among us. The Irish laborer, for instance, seeing that
his employer is contemplating some agricultural enterprise, as ditching
or fencing, suggests some old-country mode with [which] he has been
familiar from a boy, which is often found to be cheaper as well as more
ornamental than the common; and Patrick is allowed to accomplish the
object his own way, and for once exhibits some skill and has not to
be shown, but, working with a will as well as with pride, does better
than ever in the old country. Even the Irishman exhibits what might be
mistaken for a Yankee knack, exercising a merely inbred skill derived
from the long teachings and practice of his ancestors.

I saw an Irishman building a bank of sod where his employer had
contemplated building a bank wall, piling up very neatly and solidly
with his spade and a line the sods taken from the rear, and coping the
face at a very small angle from the perpendicular, intermingling the
sods with bushes as they came to hand, which would grow and strengthen
the whole. It was much more agreeable to the eye, as well as less
expensive, than stone would have been, and he thought that it would be
equally effective as a fence and no less durable. But it is true only
experience will show when the same practice may be followed in this
climate and in Ireland,—whether our atmosphere is not too dry to admit
of it. At any rate it was wise in the farmer thus to avail himself of
any peculiar experience which his hired laborer possessed. That was
what he _should_ buy.

Also I noticed the other day where one who raises seeds, when his
ropes and poles failed, had used ropes twisted of straw to support
his plants,—a resource probably suggested and supplied by his foreign
laborers. It is only remarkable that so few improvements or resources
are or are to be adopted from the Old World.

I look down on rays of prunella by the roadsides now. The panicled or
privet andromeda with its fruit-like white flowers. Swamp-pink I see
for the first time this season.

The tree-primrose (scabish)[212] (_Œnother biennais_), a rather coarse
yellow flower with a long tubular calyx, naturalized extensively in
Europe. The clasping bellflower (_Campanula perfoliata_, from the
heart-shaped leaves clasping the stalk), an interesting flower.

The _Convolvulus sepium_, large bindweed, make a fresh morning
impression as of dews and purity. The adder’s-tongue arethusa, a
delicate pink flower.

How different is day from day! Yesterday the air was filled with a
thick fog-like haze, so that the sun did not once shine with ardor,
but everything was so tempered under this thin veil that it was a
luxury merely to be outdoors,—you were less out for it. The shadows of
the apple trees even early in the afternoon were remarkably distinct.
The landscape wore a classical smoothness. Every object was as in [a]
picture with a glass over it. I saw some hills on this side the river,
looking from Conantum, on which, the grass being of a yellow tinge,
though the sun did not shine out on them, they had the appearance
of being shone upon peculiarly. It was merely an unusual yellow tint
of the grass. The mere surface of water was an object for the eye to
linger on.

The panicled cornel, a low shrub, in blossom by wall-sides now.

I thought that one peculiarity of my “Week” was its _hypæthral_
character, to use an epithet applied to those Egyptian temples which
are open to the heavens above, _under the ether_. I thought that it had
little of the atmosphere of the house about it, but might wholly have
been written, as in fact it was to a considerable extent, out-of-doors.
It was only at a late period in writing it, as it happened, that I used
any phrases implying that I lived in a house or led a _domestic_ life.
I trust it does not smell [so much] of the study and library, even of
the poet’s attic, as of the fields and woods; that it is a hypæthral or
unroofed book, lying open under the ether and permeated by it, open to
all weathers, not easy to be kept on a shelf.

The potatoes are beginning to blossom.

Riding to survey a wood-lot yesterday, I observed that a dog
accompanied the wagon. Having tied the horse at the last house and
entered the woods, I saw no more of the dog while there; but when
riding back to the village, I saw the dog again running by the wagon,
and in answer to my inquiry was told that the horse and wagon were
hired and that the dog always accompanied the horse. I queried whether
it might happen that a dog would accompany the wagon if a strange horse
were put into it; whether he would ever attach himself to an inanimate
object. Methinks the driver, though a stranger, as it were added
intellect to the mere animality of the horse, and the dog, not making
very nice distinctions, yielded respect to the horse and equipage as if
it were human. If the horse were to trot off alone without a wagon or
driver, I think it doubtful if the dog would follow; if with the wagon,
then the chances of his following would be increased; but if with a
driver, though a stranger, I have found by experience that he would
follow.

At a distance in the meadow I hear still, at long intervals, the
hurried commencement of the bobolink’s strain, the bird just dashing
into song, which is as suddenly checked, as it were, by the warder
of the seasons, and the strain is left incomplete forever. Like human
beings they are inspired to sing only for a short season.[213]

That little roadside pea-like-blossomed blue flower[214] is interesting
to me. The mulleins are just blossoming.

The voice of the crickets, heard at noon from deep in the grass, allies
day to night. It is unaffected by sun and moon. It is a midnight sound
heard at noon, a midday sound heard at midnight.

I observed some mulleins growing on the western slope of the sandy
railroad embankment, in as warm a place as can easily be found, where
the heat was reflected from the sand oppressively at 3 o’clock P. M.
this hot day; yet the green and living leaves felt rather cool than
otherwise to the hand, but the dead ones at the root were quite warm.
The living plant thus preserves a cool temperature in the hottest
exposure, as if it kept a cellar below, from which cooling liquors were
drawn up.

Yarrow is now in full bloom, and elder, and a small many-headed white
daisy like a small whiteweed. The epilobium, too, is out.

The night-warbler sings the same strain at noon. The song sparrow still
occasionally reminds me of spring.

I observe that the high water in the ponds, which have been rising
for a year, has killed most of the pitch pines and alders which it had
planted and merely watered at its edge during the years of dryness. But
now it comes to undo its own work.

How awful is the least unquestionable meanness, when we cannot deny
that we have been guilty of it. There seem to be no bounds to our
unworthiness.


_June 30._ Haying has commenced. I see the farmers in distant fields
cocking their hay now at six o’clock. The day has been so oppressively
warm that some workmen have lain by at noon, and the haymakers are
mowing now in the early twilight.

The blue flag (_Iris versicolor_) enlivens the meadow. The lark sings
at sundown off in the meadow. It is a note which belongs to a New
England summer evening. Though so late, I hear the summer hum of a bee
in the grass, as I am on my way to the river behind Hubbard’s to bathe.
After hoeing in a dusty garden all this warm afternoon,—so warm that
the baker says he never knew the like and expects to find his horses
dead in the stable when he gets home,—it is very grateful to wend one’s
way at evening to some pure and cool stream and bathe therein.

The cranberry is now in blossom. Their fresh shoots have run a foot or
two over the surface.

I have noticed an abundance of poison sumach this season. It is now in
blossom. In some instances it has the size and form of a healthy peach
tree.

The cuckoo is faintly heard from a neighboring grove. Now that it
is beginning to be dark, as I am crossing a pasture I hear a happy,
cricket-like, shrill little lay from a sparrow, either in the grass
or else on that distant tree, as if it were the vibrations of a
watch-spring; its vespers. The tree-primrose, which was so abundant in
one field last Saturday, is now all gone. The cattle on Bear Garden
Hill, seen through the twilight, look monstrously large. I find
abounding in the meadows the adder’s-tongue arethusa and occasionally
with it the _Cymbidium tuberosum_ of the same tint. The obtuse galium
is a delicate vine-like plant with a minute white blossom in the same
places. The St. John’s-wort has blossomed. The (_Œnothera pumila_, or
dwarf tree-primrose, a neat yellow flower, abounds in the meadows;
which the careless would mistake at a distance for buttercups. The
white buds of the clethra (alder-leaved) rise above their recent
shoots. The narrow-leaved cotton-grass spots the meadow with white,
seeming like loose down, its stems are so slight. The carrot growing
wild which I observed by the railroad is now blossoming, with its
dishing blossom. I found by the railroad, a quarter of a mile from
the road, some common garden catch-fly, the pink flower, growing
wild. Angelica is now in blossom, with its large umbels. Swamp rose,
fugacious-petalled. The prinos, or winterberry, budded, with white
clustered berry-like flower-buds, is a pretty contrast to itself in
the winter,—wax-like. While bathing I plucked the common floating
plant like a small yellow lily, the yellow water ranunculus (_R.
multifidus_). What I suppose is the _Aster miser_, small-flowered
aster, like a small many-headed whiteweed, has now for a week been in
bloom; a humble weed, but one of the earliest of the asters.[215] The
umbelled thesium, a simple white flower, on the edge of the woods.
_Erysimum officinale_, hedge mustard, with its yellow flowers.

I first observed about ten days ago that the fresh shoots of the fir
balsam (_Abies balsamifera_), found under the tree wilted, or plucked
and kept in the pocket or in the house a few days, emit the fragrance
of strawberries, only it is somewhat more aromatic and spicy. It was to
me a very remarkable fragrance to be emitted by a pine. A very rich,
delicious, aromatic, spicy fragrance, which if the fresh and living
shoots emitted, they would be still more to be sought after.

Saw a brood of young partridges yesterday, a little larger than robins.