Chapter V 1841.


_Jan. 23._ A day is lapsing. I hear cockerels crowing in the yard,
and see them stalking among the chips in the sun. I hear busy feet on
the floors, and the whole house jars with industry. Surely the day is
well spent, and the time is full to overflowing. Mankind is as busy
as the flowers in summer, which make haste to unfold themselves in the
forenoon, and close their petals in the afternoon.

The momentous topics of human life are always of secondary importance
to the business in hand, just as carpenters discuss politics between
the strokes of the hammer while they are shingling a roof.[193]

The squeaking of the pump sounds as necessary as the music of the
spheres.

The solidity and apparent necessity of this routine insensibly recommend
it to me. It is like a cane or a cushion for the infirm, and in view of
it all are infirm. If there were but one erect and solid-standing tree
in the woods, all creatures would go to rub against it and make sure of
their footing. Routine is a ground to stand on, a wall to retreat to;
we cannot draw on our boots without bracing ourselves against it.[194]
It is the fence over which neighbors lean when they talk. All this
cockcrowing, and hawing and geeing, and business in the streets, is like
the spring-board on which tumblers perform and develop their elasticity.
Our health requires that we should recline on it from time to time. When
we are in it, the hand stands still on the face of the clock, and we
grow like corn in the genial dankness and silence of the night.[195] Our
weakness wants it, but our strength uses it. Good for the body is the
work of the body, good for the soul the work of the soul, and good for
either the work of the other. Let them not call hard names, nor know a
divided interest.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I detect a beauty in any of the recesses of nature, I am
reminded, by the serene and retired spirit in which it requires to
be contemplated, of the inexpressible privacy of a life,—how silent
and unambitious it is. The beauty there is in mosses will have to be
considered from the holiest, quietest nook.[196]

The gods delight in stillness; they say, 'St—'st. My truest, serenest
moments are too still for emotion; they have woollen feet. In all our
lives we live under the hill, and if we are not gone we live there
still.


_Jan. 24. Sunday._ I almost shrink from the arduousness of meeting men
erectly day by day.

Be resolutely and faithfully what you are; be humbly what you aspire to
be. Be sure you give men the best of your wares, though they be poor
enough, and the gods will help you to lay up a better store for the
future. Man's noblest gift to man is his sincerity, for it embraces his
integrity also. Let him not dole out of himself anxiously, to suit their
weaker or stronger stomachs, but make a clean gift of himself, and empty
his coffers at once. I would be in society as in the landscape; in the
presence of nature there is no reserve, nor effrontery.

       *       *       *       *       *

Coleridge says of the "_ideas_ spoken out everywhere in the Old and New
Testament," that they "resemble the fixed stars, which appear of the
same size to the naked as to the armed eye; the magnitude of which the
telescope may rather seem to diminish than to increase."

       *       *       *       *       *

It is more proper for a spiritual fact to have suggested an analogous
natural one, than for the natural fact to have preceded the spiritual
in our minds.

       *       *       *       *       *

By spells seriousness will be forced to cut capers, and drink a deep and
refreshing draught of silliness; to turn this sedate day of Lucifer's
and Apollo's, into an all fools' day for Harlequin and Cornwallis. The
sun does not grudge his rays to either, but they are alike patronized
by the gods. Like overtasked schoolboys, all my members and nerves
and sinews petition Thought for a recess, and my very thigh-bones
itch to slip away from under me, and run and join the mêlée. I exult
in stark inanity, leering on nature and the soul. We think the gods
reveal themselves only to sedate and musing gentlemen. But not so; the
buffoon in the midst of his antics catches unobserved glimpses, which
he treasures for the lonely hour. When I have been playing tomfool, I
have been driven to exchange the old for a more liberal and catholic
philosophy.


_Jan. 25. Monday._ To-day I feel the migratory instinct strong in me,
and all my members and humors anticipate the breaking up of winter. If
I yielded to this impulse, it would surely guide me to summer haunts.
This indefinite restlessness and fluttering on the perch do, no doubt,
prophesy the final migration of souls out of nature to a serene summer,
in long harrows and waving lines[197] in the spring weather, over what
fair uplands and fertile Elysian meadows winging their way at evening
and seeking a resting-place with loud cackling and uproar!

       *       *       *       *       *

Wealth, no less than knowledge, is power. Among the Bedouins the richest
man is the sheik, among savages he who has most iron and wampum is
chief, and in England and America he is the merchant prince.

       *       *       *       *       *

We should strengthen, and beautify, and industriously mould our bodies
to be fit companions of the soul,—assist them to grow up like trees, and
be agreeable and wholesome objects in nature. I think if I had had the
disposal of this soul of man, I should have bestowed it sooner on some
antelope of the plains than upon this sickly and sluggish body.


_Jan. 26. Tuesday._ I have as much property as I can command and use.
If by a fault in my character I do not derive my just revenues, there is
virtually a mortgage on my inheritance. A man's wealth is never entered
in the registrar's office. Wealth does not come in along the great
thoroughfares, it does not float on the Erie or Pennsylvania canal, but
is imported by a solitary track without bustle or competition, from a
brave industry to a quiet mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

I had a dream last night which had reference to an act in my life in
which I had been most disinterested and true to my highest instinct but
completely failed in realizing my hopes; and now, after so many months,
in the stillness of sleep, complete justice was rendered me. It was a
divine remuneration. In my waking hours I could not have conceived of
such retribution; the presumption of desert would have damned the whole.
But now I was permitted to be not so much a subject as a partner to that
retribution. It was the award of divine justice, which will at length
be and is even now accomplished.[198]

       *       *       *       *       *

Good writing as well as good acting will be obedience to conscience.
There must not be a particle of will or whim mixed with it. If we can
listen, we shall hear. By reverently listening to the inner voice, we
may reinstate ourselves on the pinnacle of humanity.


_Jan. 27. Wednesday._ In the compensation of the dream, there was no
implied loss to any, but immeasurable advantage to all.[199]

       *       *       *       *       *

The punishment of sin is not positive, as is the reward of virtue.

       *       *       *       *       *

For a flower, I like the name pansy, or _pensée_, best of any.


_Jan. 28._ No innocence can quite stand up under suspicion, if it is
conscious of being suspected. In the company of one who puts a wrong
construction upon your actions, they are apt really to deserve a
mean construction. While in that society I can never retrieve myself.
Attribute to me a great motive, and I shall not fail to have one; but a
mean one, and the fountain of virtue will be poisoned by the suspicion.
Show men unlimited faith as the coin with which you will deal with them,
and they will invariably exhibit the best wares they have. I would meet
men as the friends of all their virtue, and the foes of all their vice,
for no man is the partner of his guilt. If you suspect me you will never
see me, but all our intercourse will be the politest leave-taking;
I shall constantly defer and apologize, and postpone myself in your
presence. The self-defender is accursed in the sight of gods and men; he
is a superfluous knight, who serves no lady in the land. He will find
in the end that he has been fighting windmills, and battered his mace
to no purpose. The injured man with querulous tone resisting his fate
is like a tree struck by lightning, which rustles its sere leaves the
winter through, not having vigor enough [to] cast them off.

As for apologies, I must be off with the dew and the frost, and leave
mankind to repair the damage with their gauze screens and straw.

       *       *       *       *       *

Resistance is a very wholesome and delicious morsel at times. When Venus
advanced against the Greeks with resistless valor, it was by far the
most natural attitude into which the poet could throw his hero to make
him resist heroically. To a devil one might yield gracefully, but a god
would be a worthy foe, and would pardon the affront.

       *       *       *       *       *

It would be worth while, once for all, fairly and cleanly to tell how
we are to be used, as vendors of lucifer matches send directions in the
envelope, both how light may be readily procured and no accident happen
to the user.

       *       *       *       *       *

Let your mood determine the form of salutation, and approach the
creature with a natural nonchalance, as though he were anything but what
he is, and you were anything but what you are,—as though he were he,
and you were you; in short, as though he were so insignificant that it
did not signify, and so important that it did not import. Depend upon
it, the timber is well seasoned and tough, and will bear rough usage;
and if it should crack, there is plenty more where it came from. I am no
piece of china-ware that cannot be jostled against my neighbor, without
danger of rupture from the collision, and must needs ring a scrannel
strain to the end of my days when once I am cracked; but rather one of
the old-fashioned wooden trenchers, which one while stands at the head
of the table, and at another is a milking-stool, and at another a seat
for children, and finally goes down to its grave not unadorned with
honorable scars, and does not die till it is _worn_ out. Use me, for I
am useful in my way. I stand as one of many petitioners, from toadstool
and henbane up to dahlia and violet, supplicating to be put to my use,
if by any means ye may find me serviceable; whether for a medicated
drink or bath, as balm and lavender; or for fragrance, as verbena and
geranium; or for sight, as cactus; or for thoughts, as pansy.[200]


_Jan. 29._ There is something proudly thrilling in the thought that this
obedience to conscience and trust in God, which is so solemnly preached
in extremities and arduous circumstances, is only to retreat to one's
self, and rely on our own strength. In trivial circumstances I find
myself sufficient to myself, and in the most momentous I have no ally
but myself, and must silently put by their harm by my own strength, as I
did the former. As my own hand bent aside the willow in my path, so must
my single arm put to flight the devil and his angels. God is not our
ally when we shrink, and neuter when we are bold. If by trusting in God
you lose any particle of your vigor, trust in Him no longer. When you
trust, do not lay aside your armor, but put it on and buckle it tighter.
If by reliance on the gods I have disbanded one of my forces, then was
it poor policy. I had better have retained the most inexperienced tyro
who had straggled into the camp, and let go the heavenly alliance. I
cannot afford to relax discipline because God is on my side, for He
is on the side of discipline. And if the gods were only the heavens I
fought under, I would not care if they stormed or were calm. I do not
want a countenance, but a help. And there is more of God and divine help
in a man's little finger than in idle prayer and trust.

       *       *       *       *       *

The best and bravest deed is that which the whole man—heart, lungs,
hands, fingers, and toes—at any time prompts. Each hanger-on in the
purlieus of the camp, must strike his standard at the signal from the
Prætorian tent, and fall into the line of march; but if a single sutler
delay to make up his pack, then suspect the fates and consult the omens
again. This is the meaning of integrity; this is to be an integer, and
not a fraction. Be even for all virtuous ends, but odd for all vice. Be
a perfect power, so that any of your roots multiplied into itself may
give the whole again.

       *       *       *       *       *

Beauty is compared, not measured, for it is the creature of proportions,
not of size. Size must be subdued to it. It is hard for a tall or a
short person to be beautiful.

To graft the Persian lilac on the ash, is as if you were to splice the
thigh-bones of the Venus de Medici.

       *       *       *       *       *

Friends will have to be introduced each time they meet. They will
be eternally strange to one another, and when they have mutually
appropriated their value for the last hour, they will go and gather
a new measure of strangeness for the next. They are like two boughs
crossed in the wood, which play backwards and forwards upon one another
in the wind, and only wear into each other, but never the sap of the
one flows into the pores of the other, for then the wind would no more
draw from them those strains which enchanted the wood. They are not two
united, but rather one divided.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of all strange and unaccountable things this journalizing is the
strangest. It will allow nothing to be predicated of it; its good is not
good, nor its bad bad. If I make a huge effort to expose my innermost
and richest wares to light, my counter seems cluttered with the meanest
homemade stuffs; but after months or years I may discover the wealth
of India, and whatever rarity is brought overland from Cathay, in
that confused heap, and what perhaps seemed a festoon of dried apple
or pumpkin will prove a string of Brazilian diamonds, or pearls from
Coromandel.

       *       *       *       *       *

Men lie behind the barrier of a relation as effectually concealed as the
landscape by a mist; and when at length some unforeseen accident throws
me into a new attitude to them, I am astounded, as if for the first time
I saw the sun on the hillside. They lie out before me like a new order
of things. As, when the master meets his pupil as a man, then first do
we stand under the same heavens, and master and pupil alike go down the
resistless ocean stream together.


_Jan. 30. Saturday._ Far over the fields, between the tops of yonder
wood, I see a slight cloud not larger than the vapor from a kettle,
drifting by its own inward purpose in a direction contrary to the
planet. As it flits across the dells and defiles of the tree-tops, now
seen, then lost beyond a pine, I am curious to know wherein its will
resides, for to my eye it has no heart, nor lungs, nor brain, nor any
interior and private chamber which it may inhabit.

Its motion reminds me of those lines of Milton:—

     "As when far off at sea a fleet descried
     Hangs in the clouds, by equinoctial winds
     Close sailing from Bengala, or the isles
     Of Ternate and Tidore, whence merchants bring
     Their spicy drugs; they on the trading flood,
     Ply stemming nightly toward the pole."

The snow collects upon the plumes of the pitch pine in the form of
a pineapple, which if you divide in the middle will expose three red
kernels like the tamarind-stone. So does winter with his mock harvest
jeer at the sincerity of summer. The tropical fruits, which will not
bear the rawness of our summer, are imitated in a thousand fantastic
shapes by the whimsical genius of winter.

       *       *       *       *       *

In winter the warmth comes directly from the sun, and is not radiated
from the earth. In summer I forget to bless the sun for his heat; but
when I feel his beams on my back as I thread some snowy dale, I am
grateful as for a special kindness which would not be weary of well
doing but had pursued me even into that by-place.

       *       *       *       *       *

When the wind blows, the fine snow comes filtering down through all the
aisles of the wood in a golden cloud.

       *       *       *       *       *

The trees covered with snow admit a very plain and clean light, but
not brilliant, as if through windows of ground glass; a sort of white
darkness it is, all of the sun's splendor that can be retained.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fashions of the wood are more fluctuating than those of Paris; snow,
rime, ice, green and dry leaves incessantly make new patterns. There are
all the shapes and hues of the kaleidoscope and the designs and ciphers
of books of heraldry in the outlines of the trees. Every time I see a
nodding pine-top, it seems as if a new fashion of wearing plumes had
come into vogue.

       *       *       *       *       *

I saw a team come out of a path in the woods, as though it had never
gone in, but belonged there, and only came out like Elisha's bears. It
was wholly of the village, and not at all of the wood.

       *       *       *       *       *

These particles of snow which the early wind shakes down are what is
stirring, or the morning news of the wood. Sometimes it is blown up
above the trees, like the sand of the desert.

       *       *       *       *       *

You glance up these paths, closely imbowered by bent trees, as through
the side aisles of a cathedral, and expect to hear a choir chanting from
their depths. You are never so far in them as they are far before you.
Their secret is where you are not and where your feet can never carry
you.

       *       *       *       *       *

I tread in the tracks of the fox which has gone before me by some hours,
or which perhaps I have started, with such a tiptoe of expectation as if
I were on the trail of the Spirit itself which resides in these woods,
and expected soon to catch it in its lair.[201]

       *       *       *       *       *

The snow falls on no two trees alike, but the forms it assumes are as
various as those of the twigs and leaves which receive it. They are,
as it were, predetermined by the genius of the tree. So one divine
spirit descends alike on all, but bears a peculiar fruit in each. The
divinity subsides on all men, as the snowflakes settle on the fields and
ledges and takes the form of the various clefts and surfaces on which
it lodges.

       *       *       *       *       *

Here is the distinct trail of a fox stretching [a] quarter of a mile
across the pond. Now I am curious to know what has determined its
graceful curvatures, its greater or less spaces and distinctness, and
how surely they were coincident with the fluctuations of some mind,
why they now lead me two steps to the right, and then three to the
left. If these things are not to be called up and accounted for in the
Lamb's Book of Life, I shall set them down for careless accountants.
Here was one expression of the divine mind this morning. The pond was
his journal, and last night's snow made a _tabula rasa_ for him. I know
which way a mind wended this morning, what horizon it faced, by the
setting of these tracks; whether it moved slowly or rapidly, by the
greater or less intervals and distinctness, for the swiftest step leaves
yet a lasting trace.[202]

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes I come out suddenly upon a high plain, which seems to be the
upper level and true surface of the earth, and by its very baldness
aspires and lies up nearer to the stars,—a place where a decalogue might
be let down or a saint translated.

       *       *       *       *       *

I take a horse and oxen, standing among the wood-piles in the forest,
for one of them, and when at length the horse pricks his ears, and I
give him another name, where's the difference? I am startled by the
possibility of such errors, and the indifference with [which] they are
allowed to occur.

       *       *       *       *       *

Fair Haven Pond is _scored_ with the trails of foxes, and you may see
where they have gambolled and gone through a hundred evolutions, which
testify to a singular listlessness and leisure in nature.

Suddenly, looking down the river, I saw a fox some sixty rods off,
making across to the hills on my left. As the snow lay five inches deep,
he made but slow progress, but it was no impediment to me. So, yielding
to the instinct of the chase, I tossed my head aloft and bounded away,
snuffing the air like a fox-hound, and spurning the world and the Humane
Society at each bound. It seemed the woods rang with the hunter's
horn, and Diana and all the satyrs joined in the chase and cheered
me on. Olympian and Elean youths were waving palms on the hills. In
the meanwhile I gained rapidly on the fox; but he showed a remarkable
presence of mind, for, instead of keeping up the face of the hill, which
was steep and unwooded in that part, he kept along the slope in the
direction of the forest, though he lost ground by it. Notwithstanding
his fright, he took no step which was not beautiful. The course on his
part was a series of most graceful curves. It was a sort of leopard
canter, I should say, as if he were nowise impeded by the snow, but
were husbanding his strength all the while. When he doubled I wheeled
and cut him off, bounding with fresh vigor, and Antæus-like, recovering
my strength each time I touched the snow. Having got near enough for a
fair view, just as he was slipping into the wood, I gracefully yielded
him the palm. He ran as though there were not a bone in his back,
occasionally dropping his muzzle to the snow for a rod or two, and then
tossing his head aloft when satisfied of his course. When he came to a
declivity he put his fore feet together and slid down it like a cat. He
trod so softly that you could not have heard it from any nearness, and
yet with such expression that it would not have been quite inaudible at
any distance. So, hoping this experience would prove a useful lesson to
him, I returned to the village by the highway of the river.[203]

       *       *       *       *       *

There is all the romance of my youthfulest moment in music. Heaven lies
about us, as in our infancy. There is nothing so wild and extravagant
that it does not make true. It makes a dream my only real experience,
and prompts faith to such elasticity that only the incredible can
satisfy it. It tells me again to trust the remotest and finest, as the
divinest, instinct. All that I have imagined of heroism, it reminds
and reassures me of. It is a life unlived, a life beyond life, where at
length my years will pass. I look under the lids of Time.


_Jan. 31. Sunday._ At each step man measures himself against the system.
If he cannot actually belay the sun and make it fast to this planet,
yet the British man alone spins a yarn in one year which will reach
fifty-one times the distance from the earth to the sun. So, having his
cable ready twisted and coiled, the fixed stars are virtually within
his grasp. He carries his lasso coiled at his saddle bow, but is never
forced to cast it.

All things are subdued to me by virtue of that coiled lasso I carry,
and I lead them without the trouble of a cast. It is the rope that lies
coiled on the deck, which moors my ship, and I have never to bend a
cable.

In God's hall hang cables of infinite length, and in His entries stand
bars of infinite strength; but those cables were never bent, nor those
bars ever poised, for all things have been subdued to the divinity from
the first, and these are the seals of His power.

The guilty never escape, for a steed stands ever ready saddled and
bridled at God's door, and the sinner surrenders at last.


_End of my Journal of 396 pages._


_Feb. 2. Tuesday._ It is easy to repeat, but hard to originate. Nature
is readily made to repeat herself in a thousand forms, and in the
daguerreotype her own light is amanuensis, and the picture too has more
than a surface significance,—a depth equal to the prospect,—so that the
microscope may be applied to the one as the spy-glass to the other. Thus
we may easily multiply the forms of the outward; but to give the within
outwardness, that is not easy.

That an impression may be taken, perfect stillness, though but for an
instant, is necessary. There is something analogous in the birth of all
rhymes.

Our sympathy is a gift whose value we can never know, nor when we impart
it. The instant of communion is when, for the least point of time, we
cease to oscillate, and coincide in rest by as fine a point as a star
pierces the firmament.

       *       *       *       *       *

The stars are the mountain peaks of celestial countries.

       *       *       *       *       *

A child asked its father what became of the old moon, and he said it
was cut up into stars.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is always a single ear in the audience, to which we address
ourselves.

       *       *       *       *       *

How much does it concern you, the good opinion of your friend? Therein
is the measure of fame. For the herd of men multiplied many times will
never come up to the value of one friend. In this society there is no
fame but love; for as our name may be on the lips of men, so are we in
each other's hearts. There is no ambition but virtue; for why should we
go round about, who may go direct?

All those contingencies which the philanthropist, statesman, and
housekeeper write so many books to meet are simply and quietly settled
in the intercourse of friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

For our aspirations there is no expression as yet, but if we obey
steadily, by another year we shall have learned the language of last
year's aspirations.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I read the other day the weight of some of the generals of the
Revolution, it seemed no unimportant fact in their biography. It is at
least one other means of comparing ourselves with them. Tell me how much
Milton or Shakespeare weighed, and I will get weighed myself, that I
may know better what they are to me.

Weight has something very imposing in it, for we cannot get rid of it.
Once in the scales we must weigh. And are we not always in the scales,
and weighing just our due, though we kick the beam, and do all we can
to heavy or lighten ourselves?


_Feb. 3. Wednesday._ The present seems never to get its due; it is the
least obvious,—neither before, nor behind, but within us. All the past
plays into this moment, and we are what we are. My aspiration is one
thing, my reflection another, but, over all, myself and condition is
and does. To men and nature I am each moment a finished tool,—a spade,
a barrow, or a pickaxe. This immense promise is no _efficient_ quality.
For all practical purposes I am done.

When we do a service to our neighbor, we serve our next neighbor.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are constantly invited to be what we are; as to something worthy and
noble. I never waited but for myself to come round; none ever detained
me, but I lagged or tagged after myself.

       *       *       *       *       *

It steads us to be as true to children and boors as to God himself. It
is the only attitude which will suit all occasions; it only will make
the earth yield her increase, and by it do we effectually expostulate
with the wind. If I run against a post, this is the remedy. I would
meet the morning and evening on very sincere ground. When the sun
introduces me to a new day, I silently say to myself, "Let us be
faithful all round; we will do justice and receive it." Something
like this is the secret charm of Nature's demeanor toward us, strict
conscientiousness [?] and disregard of us when we have ceased to have
regard for ourselves. So she can never offend us. How true she is!—and
never swerves. In her most genial moment her laws are as steadfastly
and relentlessly fulfilled—though the decalogue is rhymed and set to
sweetest music—as in her sternest.

       *       *       *       *       *

Any exhibition of affection—as an inadvertent word, or act, or
look—seems premature, as if the time were not ripe for it; like the buds
which the warm days near the end of winter cause to push out and unfold
before the frosts are yet gone.

       *       *       *       *       *

My life must seem as if it were passing at a higher level than that
which I occupy. It must possess a dignity which will not allow me to be
familiar.

       *       *       *       *       *

The unpretending truth of a simile implies sometimes such distinctness
in the conception as only experience could have supplied. Homer could
not improve the simile of a soldier who was careful enough to tell the
truth. If he knows what it was, he will know what it was like.

       *       *       *       *       *

As the ancient Britons were exhibited in Rome in their native costume,
and the Dacian came to display his swordsmanship in the arena, so
Tyrolese peasants have come farther yet, even from the neighborhood of
Rome to Concord, for our entertainment this night.


_Feb. 4. Thursday._ When you are once comfortably seated at a public
meeting, there is something unmanly in the sitting on tiptoe and _qui
vive_ attitude,—the involuntarily rising into your throat, as if gravity
had ceased to operate,—when a lady approaches, with quite godlike
presumption, to elicit the miracle of a seat where none is.

       *       *       *       *       *

Music will make the most nervous chord vibrate healthily.

       *       *       *       *       *

Such a state of unrest becomes only a fluttered virtue. When once I have
learned my place in the sphere, I will fill it once for all, rather
like a fixed star than a planet. I will rest as the mountains do, so
that your ladies might as well walk into the midst of the Tyrol, and
look for Nature to spread them a green lawn for their disport in the
midst of those solemn fastnesses, as that I should fly out of my orbit
at their approach and go about eccentric, like a comet, to endanger
other systems. No, be true to your instincts, and sit; wait till you can
be genuinely polite, if it be till doomsday, and not lose your chance
everlastingly by a cowardly yielding to young etiquette. By your look
say unto them, The lines have fallen to me in pleasant places, and I
will fill that station God has assigned me. As well Miss Cassiopeia up
there might ask the brazen-fronted Taurus to draw in his horns, that
she might shine in his stead. No, no! not till my cycle is completed.

How is it that motion will always find space to move in, and rest a
seat? Men hate antagonism, and the weaker will always yield to the
stronger. If a stranger enter with sufficient determination into a
crowded assembly, as if commissioned by the gods to find a seat there,
as the falling stone by a divine impulse seeks a resting-place, each
one will rise without thinking to offer his place. Now we have only to
be commissioned to sit, and depend upon it the gods will not balk their
own work. Ye came one day too late, as did the poet after the world
had been divided, and so returned to dwell with the god that sent him.
When presumptuous womanhood demands to surrender my position, I bide my
time,—though it be with misgiving,—and yield to no mortal shove, but
expect a divine impulse. Produce your warrant, and I will retire; for
not now can I give you a clear seat, but must leave part of my manhood
behind and wander a diminished man, who at length will not have length
and breadth enough to fill any seat at all. It was very kind in the gods
who gave us a now condition, or condition of rest, in which we might
unhurriedly deliberate before taking a step. When I give up my now and
here without having secured my then and there, I am the prodigal son of
a kind father and deserve no better than the husks which the swine eat,
nor that the fatted calf be killed for me.

Rest forever. When instinct comes to the rescue of your politeness, it
will seat you securely still, though it be to hang by a rail or poise
yourself on a stick. To do otherwise is to be polite only as the soldier
who runs away when the enemy demands his post. Politeness is rather
when the generals interchange civilities before the fight, not when one
returns a sword after the victory.

       *       *       *       *       *

Not only in his cunning hand and brain, but when he speaks, too, does
man assert his superiority. He conquers the spaces with his voice, as
well as the lion. The voice of a strong man modulated to the cadence
of some tune is more imposing than any natural sound. The keeper's is
the most commanding, and is heard over all the din of the menagerie. A
strong, musical voice imposes a new order and harmony upon nature; from
it as a centre the law is promulgated to the universe. What it lacks
in volume and loudness may always be made up in musical expression and
distinctness. The brute growls to secure obedience; he threatens. The
man speaks as though obedience were already secured.

       *       *       *       *       *

Brave speaking is the most entire and richest sacrifice to the gods.


_Feb. 5. Friday._ Only on rare occasions am I reminded that man too has
a voice, as well as birds and quadrupeds, which breaks on the stillness
of nature with its peculiar accent. The least sound pervades and
subdues all space to it as long as it fills my ear. Contrasted single
with the silence, it is as wide as it. Music is the crystallization of
sound. There is something in the effect of a harmonious voice upon the
disposition of its neighborhood analogous to the law of crystals; it
centralizes itself and sounds like the published law of things. If the
law of the universe were to be audibly promulgated, no mortal lawgiver
would suspect it, for it would be a finer melody than his ears ever
attended to. It would be sphere music.[204]

       *       *       *       *       *

When by tutoring their voices singers enhance one another's performance,
the harmony is more complete and essential than is heard. The quire is
one family held together by a very close bond. Hence the romance we
associate with Gypsies and circus companies and strolling musicians.
The idea of brotherhood is so strong in them. Their society is ideal
for that one end.

There is something in this brotherhood—this feeling of kind, or
kindness—which insensibly elevates the subjects of it in our eyes.
However poor or mean, they have something which counterbalances our
contempt. This is that in the strolling pauper _family_ which does
not court our charity but can even bless and smile on us and make the
kindness reciprocal. It sanctifies the place and the hour.

These Rainers, if they are not brothers and sisters, must be uncles and
cousins at least. These Swiss who have come to sing to us, we have no
doubt are the flower of the Tyrol.[205] Such is the instinctive kindness
with which the foreigner is always received, that he is ever presumed
to be the fairest and noblest of his race. The traveller finds that it
is not easy to move away from his friends, after all, but all people
whom he visits are anxious to supply the place to him of his parents
and brothers and sisters. To these Swiss I find that I have attributed
all Tell's patriotism and the devotion of Arnold Winkelried and whatever
goodness or greatness belongs to the nation.

       *       *       *       *       *

All costume off a man, when not simply doffed, is grotesque. There
must be a heart inside it. When these Swiss appear before me in gaiters
and high-crowned hats with feathers, I am disposed to laugh, but soon
I see that their serious eye becomes these and they it. It is the
sincere life passed within it which consecrates the costume of any
people. A sufficiently sober eye will retrieve itself and subordinate
any grotesqueness. Let Harlequin be taken with a fit of the colic in
the midst of his buffoonery, and his trappings and finery will serve
that mood too and with their drooping sympathy enhance the sincerity of
his misfortune. When the soldier is hit by a cannon-ball, rags are as
becoming as purple.[206] So soon as a man engages to eat, drink, sleep,
walk, and sit, and meet all the contingencies of life therein, his
costume is hallowed and a theme for poetry, whether it be a bear's skin
or ermine, a beaver hat or a Turkish turban. He will not wear anything
because it is blue, or black, or round, or square, but from a necessity
which cannot be superseded.

I look into the face and manners for something familiar and homely even,
to be assured that the costume of the foreigner is not whimsical or
finical.

       *       *       *       *       *

In all emergencies there is always one step which you may take on firm
ground where gravity will assure you footing. So you hold a draft on
Fate payable at sight.


_Feb. 6. Saturday._ One may discover a new side to his most intimate
friend when for the first time he hears him speak in public. He will
be stranger to him as he is more familiar to the audience. The longest
intimacy could not foretell how he would behave then. When I observe my
friend's conduct toward others, then chiefly I learn the traits in his
character, and in each case I am unprepared for the issue.

When one gets up to address briefly a strange audience, in that little
he may have opportunity to say he will not quite do himself injustice.
For he will instantly and instinctively average himself to his audience,
and while he is true to his own character still, he will in a few
moments make that impression which a series of months and years would
but expand. Before he answers, his thought like lightning runs round the
whole compass of his experiences, and he is scrupulous to speak from
that which he is and with a more entire truthfulness than usual. How
little do we know each other then! Who can tell how his friend would
behave on any occasion?

       *       *       *       *       *

As for those Swiss, I think of the fields their hands have plowed and
reaped, and respect their costume as the memorial or rather cotemporary
and witness of this. What is there in a toga but a Roman? What but a
Quaker in a broad-brimmed hat? He who describes the dress of a Janizary
going to war does me a similar service as when he paints the scenery of
the battle-field. It helps make his exploit picturesque.

Costume is not determined by whim, not even the tattooing and paint
of the savage. Sun, wind, rain, and the form of our bodies shape our
hats and coats for us, more even than taste. Good taste secures the
utmost gratification without sacrificing any conveniences. If all
nations derived their fashions from Paris or London, the world would
seem like a Vanity Fair or all fools' day, and the Tartar and Bedouin
ride in it like jesters in a circus, and the Pawnee and Esquimau
hunt in masquerade. What I am must make you forget what I wear. The
fashionable world is content to be eclipsed by its dress, and never will
bear the contrast. Only industry will reform _their_ dress. They are
idle,—_exo_strious, building without.

       *       *       *       *       *

The value of the recess in any public entertainment consists in the
opportunity for self-recovery which it offers. We who have been swayed
as one heart, expanding and contracting with the common pulse, find
ourselves in the interim, and set us up again, and feel our own hearts
beating in our breasts. We are always a little astonished to see a man
walking across the room, through an attentive audience, with any degree
of self-possession. He makes himself strange to us. He is a little
stubborn withal, and seems to say, "I am self-sustained and independent
as well as the performer, and am not to be swallowed up in the common
enthusiasm. No, no, there are two of us, and John's as good as Thomas."
In the recess the audience is cut up into a hundred little coteries,
and as soon as each individual life has recovered its tone and the
purposes of health have been answered, it is time for the performances
to commence again.

       *       *       *       *       *

In a public performer, the simplest actions, which at other times are
left to unconscious nature, as the ascending a few steps in front of an
audience, acquire a fatal importance and become arduous deeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I select one here and another there, and strive to join sundered
thoughts, I make but a partial heap after all. Nature strews her nuts
and flowers broadcast, and never collects them into heaps. A man does
not tell us all he has thought upon truth or beauty at a sitting, but,
from his last thought on the subject, wanders through a varied scenery
of upland, meadow, and woodland to his next. Sometimes a single and
casual thought rises naturally and inevitably with a queenly majesty and
escort, like the stars in the east. Fate has surely enshrined it in this
hour and circumstances for some purpose. What she has joined together,
let not man put asunder. Shall I transplant the primrose by the river's
brim, to set it beside its sister on the mountain? _This_ was the soil
it grew in, _this_ the hour it bloomed in. If sun, wind, and rain came
_here_ to cherish and expand it, shall not we come here to pluck it?
Shall we require it to grow in a conservatory for our convenience?

       *       *       *       *       *

I feel slightly complimented when Nature condescends to make use of me
without my knowledge, as when I help scatter her seeds in my walk, or
carry burs and cockles on my clothes from field to field.[207] I feel
as though I had done something for the commonweal, and were entitled
to board and lodging. I take such airs upon me as the boy who holds a
horse for the circus company, whom all the spectators envy.

       *       *       *       *       *

"Lu ral lu ral lu" may be more impressively sung than very respectable
wisdom talked. It is well-timed, as wisdom is not always.

       *       *       *       *       *

All things prophesy but the prophet. In augury and divination nature
is put to the torture. In Ben Jonson's tragedy of "Catiline," Lentulus
makes answer to Catiline, who has bribed the augurs to say that he is
that third Cornelius who is to be king of Rome, "All prophecies, you
know, suffer the torture." He who inspects the entrails is _always_
bribed, but they are unbribable. He who seeks to know the future by
unlawful means has unavoidably subjected the oracle to the torture of
_private_ and _partial_ interests. The oracles of God serve the public
interest without fee. To the just and benevolent mind nature _declares_,
as the sun lights the world.


_Feb. 7. Sunday._ Without greatcoat or drawers I have advanced thus
far into the snow-banks of the winter, without thought and with
impunity.[208] When I meet my neighbors in muffs and furs and tippets,
they look as if they had retreated into the interior fastnesses from
some foe invisible to me. They remind me that this is the season of
winter, in which it becomes a man to be cold. For feeling, I am a piece
of clean wood of this shape, which will do service till it rots, and
though the cold has its physical effect on me, it is a kindly one, for
it "finds its acquaintance there." My diet is so little stimulating,
and my body in consequence so little heated, as to excite no antagonism
in nature, but flourishes like a tree, which finds even the winter
genial to its expansion and the secretion of sap. May not the body
defend itself against cold by its very nakedness, and its elements be
so simple and single that they cannot congeal? Frost does not affect
one but several. My body now affords no more pasture for cold than a
leafless twig.[209] I call it a protestant warmth. My limbs do not tire
as formerly, but I use myself as any other piece of nature, and from
mere indifference and thoughtlessness may break the timber.

It is the vice of the last season which compels us to arm ourselves for
the next. If man always conformed to Nature, he would not have to defend
himself against her, but find her his constant nurse and friend, as do
plants and quadrupeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the sunshine and the crowing of cocks I feel an illimitable holiness,
which makes me bless God and myself. The warm sun casts his incessant
gift at my feet as I walk along, unfolding his yellow worlds. Yonder
sexton with a few cheap sounds makes me richer than these who mind his
summons. The true gift is as wide as my gratitude, and as frequent, and
the donor is as grateful as the recipient. There would be a New Year's
gift indeed, if we would bestow on each other our sincerity. We should
communicate our wealth, and not purchase that which does not belong to
us for a sign. Why give each other a sign to keep? If we gave the thing
itself, there would be no need of a sign.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am not sure I should find out a really great person soon. He would be
simple Thomas or Oliver for some centuries first. The lesser eminences
would hide the higher, and I should at last reach his top by a gentle
acclivity. I felt it would be necessary to remain some weeks at the
Notch to be impressed by the grandeur of the scenery. We do not expect
that Alexander will conquer Asia the first time we are introduced to
him. A great man accepts the occasion the fates offer him. Let us not
be disappointed. We stand at first upon the pampas which surround him.
It is these mountains round about which make the valleys here below. He
is not a dead level, so many feet above low-water mark. Greatness is in
the ascent. But there is no accounting for the little men.

                 "They must sweat no less
     To fit their properties, than t' express their parts."

Or the line before this:—

             "Would you have
     Such an Herculean actor in the scene,
     And not his hydra?"—JONSON.

The eaves are running on the south side of the house; the titmouse
lisps in the poplar; the bells are ringing for church; while the sun
presides over all and makes his simple warmth more obvious than all
else.[210] What shall I do with this hour, so like time and yet so
fit for eternity? Where in me are these russet patches of ground, and
scattered logs and chips in the yard? I do not feel cluttered. I have
some notion what the John's-wort and life-everlasting may be thinking
about when the sun shines on me as on them and turns my prompt thought
into just such a seething shimmer. I lie out indistinct as a heath at
noonday. I am evaporating and ascending into the sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing stands in the way to success, but to failure. To victory is
all the way up hill; to defeat the simplest wight that weighs may soon
slide down. Cowards would not have victory but the fruits of victory;
but she it is that sweetens all the spoil. Thus, by a just fate, the
booty cannot fall to him who did not win it. There is victory in every
effort. In the least swing of the arm, in indignant thought, in stern
content, we conquer our foes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Great thoughts make great men. Without these no heraldry nor blood will
avail.

The blood circulates to the feet and hands, but the thought never
descends from the head.

       *       *       *       *       *

The most I can do for my friend is simply to be his friend. I have no
wealth to bestow on him. If he knows that I am happy in loving him, he
will want no other reward. Is not Friendship divine in this?

I have myself to respect, but to myself I am not amiable; but my friend
is my amiableness personified.

And yet we walk the stage indifferent actors, not thinking what a
sublime drama we might enact if we would be joint workers and a mutual
material. Why go to the woods to cut timber to display our art upon,
when here are men as trees walking? The world has never learned what men
can build each other up to be, when both master and pupil work in love.

He that comes as a stranger to my house will have to stay as a stranger.
He has made his own reception. But persevering love was never yet
refused.

     "The vicious count their years, virtuous their acts."

                                                   JONSON.

The former consider the length of their service, the latter its quality.

     Wait not till I invite thee, but observe
     I'm glad to see thee when thou com'st.[211]

The most ardent lover holds yet a private court, and his love can never
be so strong or ethereal that there will not be danger that judgment
may be rendered against the beloved.

       *       *       *       *       *

I would have men make a _greater_ use of me.[212] Now I must belittle
myself to have dealings with them. My friend will show such a noble
confidence that I shall aspire to the society of his good opinion. Never
presume men less that you may make them more. So far as we respond to
our ideal estimate of each other do we have profitable intercourse.

       *       *       *       *       *

A brave man always knows the way, no matter how intricate the roads.


_Feb. 8._ All we have experienced is so much gone within us, and there
lies. It is the company we keep. One day, in health or sickness, it will
come out and be remembered. Neither body nor soul forgets anything. The
twig always remembers the wind that shook it, and the stone the cuff it
received. Ask the old tree and the sand.

       *       *       *       *       *

To be of most service to my brother I must meet him on the most equal
and even ground, the platform on which our lives are passing. But how
often does politeness permit this?

       *       *       *       *       *

I seek a man who will appeal to me when I am in fault. We will treat as
gods settling the affairs of men. In his intercourse I shall be always a
god to-day, who was a man yesterday. He will never confound me with my
guilt, but let me be immaculate and hold up my skirts. Differences he
will make haste to clear up, but leave agreements unsettled the while.

       *       *       *       *       *

As time is measured by the lapse of ideas, we may grow of our own force,
as the mussel adds new circles to its shell. My thoughts secrete the
lime. We may grow old with the vigor of youth. Are we not always in
youth so long as we face heaven? We may always live in the morning of
our days. To him who seeks early, the sun never gets over the edge of
the hill, but his rays fall slanting forever. His wise sayings are like
the chopping of wood and crowing of cocks in the dawn.

       *       *       *       *       *

My Journal is that of me which would else spill over and run to waste,
gleanings from the field which in action I reap. I must not live for
it, but in it for the gods. They are my correspondent, to whom daily I
send off this sheet postpaid. I am clerk in their counting-room, and
at evening transfer the account from day-book to ledger. It is as a
leaf which hangs over my head in the path. I bend the twig and write
my prayers on it; then letting it go, the bough springs up and shows
the scrawl to heaven. As if it were not kept shut in my desk, but were
as public a leaf as any in nature. It is papyrus by the riverside;
it is vellum in the pastures; it is parchment on the hills. I find it
everywhere as free as the leaves which troop along the lanes in autumn.
The crow, the goose, the eagle carry my quill, and the wind blows the
leaves as far as I go. Or, if my imagination does not soar, but gropes
in slime and mud, then I write with a reed.

It is always a chance scrawl, and commemorates some accident,—as great
as earthquake or eclipse. Like the sere leaves in yonder vase, these
have been gathered far and wide. Upland and lowland, forest and field
have been ransacked.

       *       *       *       *       *

In our holiest moment our devil with a leer stands close at hand. He
is a very busy devil. It gains vice some respect, I must confess, thus
to be reminded how indefatigable it is. It has at least the merit of
industriousness. When I go forth with zeal to some good work, my devil
is sure to get his robe tucked up the first and arrives there as soon
as I, with a look of sincere earnestness which puts to shame my best
intent. He is as forward as I to a good work, and as disinterested. He
has a winning way of recommending himself by making himself useful. How
readily he comes into my best project, and does his work with a quiet
and steady cheerfulness which even virtue may take pattern from.

I never was so rapid in my virtue but my vice kept up with me. It always
came in by a hand, and never panting, but with a curried coolness
halted, as if halting were the beginning not the end of the course.
It only runs the swifter because it has no rider. It never was behind
me but when I turned to look and so fell behind myself. I never did a
charitable thing but there he stood, scarce in the rear, with hat in
hand, partner on the same errand, ready to share the smile of gratitude.
Though I shut the door never so quick and tell it to stay at home like
a good dog, it will out with me, for I shut in my own legs so, and it
escapes in the meanwhile and is ready to back and reinforce me in most
virtuous deeds. And if I turn and say, "Get thee behind me," he then
indeed turns too and takes the lead, though he seems to retire with a
pensive and compassionate look, as much as to say, "Ye know not what ye
do."

Just as active as I become to virtue, just so active is my remaining
vice. Every time we teach our virtue a new nobleness, we teach our vice
a new cunning. When we sharpen the blade it will stab better as well
as whittle. The scythe that cuts will cut our legs. We are double-edged
blades, and every time we whet our virtue the return stroke straps our
vice. And when we cut a clear descending blow, our vice on t'other edge
rips up the work. Where is the skillful swordsman that can draw his
blade straight back out of the wound?[213]

Every man proposes fairly, and does not willfully take the devil for his
guide; as our shadows never fall between us and the sun. Go towards the
sun and your shadow will fall behind you.


_Feb. 9. Tuesday._

     "_Cato._ Good Marcus Tullius (which is more than great),
              Thou hadst thy education with the gods."

                                                      JONSON.

Better be defamed than overpraised. Thou canst then justly praise
thyself. What notoriety art thou that can be defamed? Who can be praised
for what they are not deserve rather to be damned for what they are. It
is hard to wear a dress that is too long and loose without stumbling.

                             "Whoe'er is raised,
     For wealth he has not, he is tax'd, not prais'd,"

says Jonson. If you mind the flatterer, you rob yourself and still cheat
him. The fates never exaggerate; men pass for what they are. The state
never fails to get a revenue out of you without a direct tax. Flattery
would lay a direct tax. What I am praised for what I am not I put to
the account of the gods. It needs a skillful eye to distinguish between
their coin and my own. But however there can be no loss either way, for
what meed I have earned is equally theirs. Let neither fame nor infamy
hit you, but the one go as far beyond as the other falls behind. Let
the one glance past you to the gods, and the other wallow where it was
engendered. The home thrusts are at helmets upon blocks, and my worst
foes but stab an armor through.

       *       *       *       *       *

My life at this moment is like a summer morning when birds are singing.
Yet that is false, for nature's is an idle pleasure in comparison: my
hour has a more solid serenity. I have been breaking silence these
twenty-three years and have hardly made a rent in it. Silence has
no end; speech is but the beginning of it. My friend thinks I _keep_
silence, who am only choked with letting it out so fast. Does he forget
that new mines of secrecy are constantly opening in me?

       *       *       *       *       *

If any scorn your love, let them see plainly that you serve not them
but another. If these bars are up, go your way to other of God's
pastures, and browse there the while. When your host shuts his door on
you he incloses you in the dwelling of nature. He thrusts you over the
threshold of the world. My foes restore me to my friends.

       *       *       *       *       *

I might say friendship had no ears as love has no eyes, for no word
is evidence in its court. The least act fulfills more than all words
profess. The most gracious speech is but partial kindness, but the least
genuine deed takes the whole man. If we had waited till doomsday it
could never have been uttered.


_Feb. 10. Wednesday._ That was fine praise which Ben Jonson gave to
Thomas, Lord Chancellor:—

     "Whilst thou art certain to thy words, once gone,
     As is thy conscience, which is always one."

Words do not lose their truth by time or misinterpretation, but stand
unscathed longer than he who spoke them.

Let our words be such as we may unblushingly behold sculptured in
granite on the walls to the least syllable. Our thoughts and actions
may be very private for a long time, for they demand a more catholic
publicity to be displayed in than the world can afford. Our best deeds
shun the narrow walks of men, and are not ambitious of the faint light
the world can shed on them, but delight to unfold themselves in that
public ground between God and conscience.

Truth has for audience and spectator all the world. Within, where I
resolve and deal with principles, there is more space and room than
anywhere without, where my hands execute. Men should hear of your virtue
only as they hear the creaking of the earth's axle and the music of
the spheres. It will fall into the course of nature and be effectually
concealed by publicness.

       *       *       *       *       *

I asked a man to-day if he would rent me some land, and he said he had
four acres as good soil "as any outdoors." It was a true poet's account
of it. He and I, and all the world, went outdoors to breathe the free
air and stretch ourselves. For the world is but outdoors,—and we duck
behind a panel.


_Feb. 11._ True help, for the most part, implies a greatness in him who
is to be helped as well as in the helper. It takes a god to be helped
even. A great person, though unconsciously, will constantly give you
great opportunities to serve him, but a mean one will quite preclude
all active benevolence. It needs but simply and _greatly_ to want it for
once, that all true men may contend who shall be foremost to render aid.
My neighbor's state must pray to heaven so devoutly yet disinterestedly
as he never prayed in words, before my ears can hear. It must ask
divinely. But men so cobble and botch their request, that you must stoop
as low as they to give them aid. Their meanness would drag down your
deed to be a compromise with conscience, and not leave it to be done on
the high table-land of the benevolent soul. They would have you doff
your bright and knightly armor and drudge for them,—serve _them_ and
not God. But if I am to serve them I must not serve the devil.

What is called charity is no charity, but the interference of a
third person. Shall I interfere with fate? Shall I defraud man of the
opportunities which God gave him, and so take away his life? Beggars
and silent poor cry—how often!—"Get between me and my god." I will not
stay to cobble and patch God's rents, but do clean, new work when he
has given me my hands full. This almshouse charity is like putting new
wine into old bottles, when so many tuns in God's cellars stand empty.
We go about mending the times, when we should be building the eternity.

I must serve a strong master, not a weak one. Help implies a sympathy
of energy and effort, else no alleviation will avail.


_Feb. 12. Friday._ Those great men who are unknown to their own
generation are already famous in the society of the great who have gone
before them. All worldly fame but subsides from their high estimate
beyond the stars. We may still keep pace with those who have gone out
of nature, for we run on as smooth ground as they.

The early and the latter saints are separated by no eternal interval.

The child may soon stand face to face with the best father.


_Feb. 13._ By the truthfulness of our story to-day we help explain
ourselves for all our life henceforth. How we hamper and belay ourselves
by the least exaggeration! The truth is God's concern; He will sustain
it; but who can afford to maintain a lie? We have taken away one of the
Pillars of Hercules, and must support the world on our shoulders, who
might have walked freely upon it.

       *       *       *       *       *

My neighbor says that his hill-farm is poor stuff and "only fit to hold
the world together."[214] He deserves that God should give him better
for so brave a treating of his gifts, instead of humbly putting up
therewith. It is a sort of stay, or gore, or gusset, and he will not
be blinded by modesty or gratitude, but sees it for what it is; knowing
his neighbor's fertile land, he calls his by its right name. But perhaps
my farmer forgets that his lean soil has sharpened his wits. This is a
crop it was good for. And beside, you see the heavens at a lesser angle
from the hill than from the vale.

       *       *       *       *       *

We have nothing to fear from our foes; God keeps a standing army for
that service; but we have no ally against our friends, those ruthless
vandals whose kind intent is a subtler poison than the Colchian, a more
fatal shaft than the Lydian.[215]


_Feb. 14. Sunday._ I am confined to the house by bronchitis, and so
seek to content myself with that quiet and serene life there is in a
warm corner by the fireside, and see the sky through the chimney-top.
Sickness should not be allowed to extend further than the body. We
need only to retreat further within us to preserve uninterrupted the
continuity of serene hours to the end of our lives.

As soon as I find my chest is not of tempered steel, and heart of
adamant, I bid good-by to these and look out a new nature. I will be
liable to no accidents.

       *       *       *       *       *

I shall never be poor while I can command a still hour in which to take
leave of my sin.

       *       *       *       *       *

The jingling team which is creaking past reminds me of that verse in
the Bible which speaks of God being heard in the bells of the horses.


_Feb. 15._ There is elevation in every hour. No part of the earth is so
low and withdrawn that the heavens cannot be seen from it, but every
part supports the sky. We have only to stand on the eminence of the
hour, and look out thence into the empyrean, allowing no pinnacle above
us, to command an uninterrupted horizon. The moments will lie outspread
around us like a blue expanse of mountain and valley, while we stand
on the summit of our hour as if we had descended on eagle's wings. For
the eagle has stooped to his perch on the highest cliff and has never
climbed the rock; he stands by his wings more than by his feet. We shall
not want a foothold, but wings will sprout from our shoulders, and we
shall walk securely, self-sustained.

       *       *       *       *       *

For how slight an accident shall two noble souls wait to bring them
together!


_Feb. 17._ Our work should be fitted to and lead on the time, as bud,
flower, and fruit lead the circle of the seasons.

       *       *       *       *       *

The mechanic works no longer than his labor will pay for lights, fuel,
and shop rent. Would it not be well for us to consider if our deed will
warrant the expense of nature? Will it maintain the sun's light?

       *       *       *       *       *

Our actions do not use time independently, as the bud does. They should
constitute its lapse. It is their room. But they shuffle after and serve
the hour.


_Feb. 18. Thursday._ I do not judge men by anything they can do. Their
greatest deed is the impression they make on me. Some serene, inactive
men can do everything. Talent only indicates a depth of character in
some direction. We do not acquire the ability to do new deeds, but a new
capacity for all deeds. My recent growth does not appear in any visible
new talent, but its deed will enter into my gaze when I look into the
sky, or vacancy. It will help me to consider ferns and everlasting. Man
is like a tree which is limited to no age, but grows as long as it has
its root in the ground. We have only to live in the alburnum and not in
the old wood. The gnarled stump has as tender a bud as the sapling.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes I find that I have frequented a higher society during sleep,
and my thoughts and actions proceed on a higher level in the morning.

       *       *       *       *       *

A man is the hydrostatic paradox, the counterpoise of the system. You
have studied flowers and birds cheaply enough, but you must lay yourself
out to buy him.


_Feb. 19._ A truly good book attracts very little favor to itself. It
is so true that it teaches me better than to read it. I must soon lay
it down and commence living on its hint. I do not see how any can be
written more, but this is the last effusion of genius. When I read an
indifferent book, it seems the best thing I can do, but the inspiring
volume hardly leaves me leisure to finish its latter pages. It is
slipping out of my fingers while I read. It creates no atmosphere
in which it may be perused, but one in which its teachings may be
practiced. It confers on me such wealth that I lay it down with the
least regret. What I began by reading I must finish by acting. So I
cannot stay to hear a _good_ sermon and applaud at the conclusion, but
shall be half-way to Thermopylæ before that.

       *       *       *       *       *

When any joke or hoax traverses the Union in the newspapers it apprises
me of a fact which no geography or guide-book contains, of a certain
leisure and nonchalance pervading society. It is a piece of information
from over the Alleghanies, which I know how to prize, though I did
not expect it. And it is just so in Nature. I sometimes observe in
her a strange trifling, almost listlessness, which conducts to beauty
and grace,—the fantastic and whimsical forms of snow and ice, the
unaccountable freaks which the tracks of rabbits exhibit. I know now
why all those busy speculators do not die of fever and ague.

       *       *       *       *       *

Coleridge observed the "landscapes made by damp on a whitewashed wall,"
and so have I.

       *       *       *       *       *

We seem but to linger in manhood to tell the dreams of our childhood,
and they vanish out of memory ere we learn the language.[216]

       *       *       *       *       *

It is the unexplored grandeur of the storm which keeps up the spirits
of the traveller.[217] When I contemplate a hard and bare life in the
woods, I find my last consolation in its untrivialness. Shipwreck is
less distressing because the breakers do not trifle with us. We are
resigned as long as we recognize the sober and solemn mystery of nature.
The dripping mariner finds consolation and sympathy in the infinite
sublimity of the storm. It is a moral force as well as he. With courage
he can lay down his life on the strand, for it never turned a deaf ear
to him, nor has he ever exhausted its sympathy.

       *       *       *       *       *

In the love of narrow souls I make many short voyages, but in vain; I
find no sea-room. But in great souls I sail before the wind without a
watch, and never reach the shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

You demand that I be less your friend that you may know it.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing will reconcile friends but love. They make a fatal mistake when
they go about like foes to explain and treat with one another. It is a
mutual mistake. None are so unmanageable.


_Feb. 20. Saturday._ I suspect the moral discrimination of the oldest
and best authors. I doubt if Milton distinguished greatly between his
Satan and his Raphael. In Homer and Æschylus and Dante I miss a nice
discrimination of the _important_ shades of character.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I am going out for an evening I arrange the fire in my stove so
that I do not fail to find a good one when I return, though it would
have engaged my frequent attention present. So that, when I know I am to
be at home, I sometimes make believe that I may go out, to save trouble.
And this is the art of living, too,—to leave our life in a condition to
go alone, and not to require a constant supervision. We will then sit
down serenely to live, as by the side of a stove.

When I sit in earnest, nothing must stand, all must be sedentary with me.

       *       *       *       *       *

I hear the faint sound of a viol and voices from the neighboring
cottage, and think to myself, "I will believe the Muse only for
evermore." It assures me that no gleam which comes over the serene soul
is deceptive. It warns me of a reality and substance, of which the best
that I see is but the phantom and shadow. O music, thou tellest me of
things of which memory takes no heed; thy strains are whispered aside
from memory's ear.

This is the noblest plain of earth, over which these sounds are borne,
the plain of Troy or Eleusis.

       *       *       *       *       *

Thou openest all my senses to catch thy least hint, and givest me no
thought. It would be good to sit at my door of summer evenings forever
and hear thy strains. Thou makest me to toy with speech, or walk content
without it, not regretting its absence. I am pleased to think how
ignorant and shiftless the wisest are. My imperfect sympathies with my
friend are cheerful, glimmering light in the valley.


_Feb. 21. Sunday._ It is hard to preserve equanimity and greatness
on that debatable ground between love and esteem. There is nothing so
stable and unfluctuating as love. The waves beat steadfast on its shore
forever, and its tide has no ebb. It is a resource in all extremities,
and a refuge even from itself. And yet love will not be leaned on.


_Feb. 22._ Love is the tenderest mood of that which is tough—and the
toughest mood of that which is tender. It may be roughly handled as the
nettle, or gently as the violet. It has its holidays, but is not made
for them.

       *       *       *       *       *

The whole of the day should not be daytime, nor of the night night-time,
but some portion be rescued from time to oversee time in. All our hours
must not be current; all our time must not lapse. There must be one hour
at least which the day did not bring forth,—of ancient parentage and
long-established nobility,—which will be a serene and lofty platform
overlooking the rest. We should make our notch every day on our
characters, as Robinson Crusoe on his stick. We must be at the helm at
least once a day; we must feel the tiller-rope in our hands, and know
that if we sail, we steer.

       *       *       *       *       *

Friends will be much apart; they will respect more each other's privacy
than their communion, for therein is the fulfillment of our high aims
and the conclusion of our arguments. That we know and would associate
with not only has high intents, but goes on high errands, and has much
private business. The hours he devotes to me were snatched from higher
society. He is hardly a gift level to me, but I have to reach up to take
it. My imagination always assigns him a nobler employment in my absence
than ever I find him engaged in.[218]

We have to go into retirement religiously, and enhance our meeting by
rarity and a degree of unfamiliarity. Would you know why I see thee so
seldom, my friend? In solitude I have been making up a packet for thee.

       *       *       *       *       *

The actions which grow out of some common but natural relations affect
me strangely, as sometimes the behavior of a mother to her children.
So quiet and noiseless an action often moves me more than many sounding
exploits.


_Feb. 23. Tuesday._ Let all our stores and munitions be provided for
the lone state.

       *       *       *       *       *

The care of the body is the highest exercise of prudence. If I
have brought this weakness on my lungs, I will consider calmly and
disinterestedly how the thing came about, that I may find out the truth
and render justice. Then, after patience, I shall be a wiser man than
before.

Let us apply all our wit to the repair of our bodies, as we would mend a
harrow, for the body will be dealt plainly and implicitly with. We want
no moonshine nor surmises about it. This matter of health and sickness
has no fatality in it, but is a subject for the merest prudence.
If I know not what ails me, I may resort to amulets and charms and,
moonstruck, die of dysentery.

We do wrong to slight our sickness and feel so ready to desert our
posts when we are harassed. So much the more should we rise above our
condition, and make the most of it, for the fruit of disease may be as
good as that of health.[219]

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a subtle elixir in society which makes it a fountain of
health to the sick. We want no consolation which is not the overflow
of our friend's health. We will have no condolence who are not dolent
ourselves. We would have our friend come and respire healthily before
us, with the fragrance of many meadows and heaths in his breath, and we
will inhabit his body while our own recruits.

Nothing is so good medicine in sickness as to witness some nobleness in
another which will advertise us of health. In sickness it is our faith
that ails, and noble deeds reassure us.

       *       *       *       *       *

That anybody has thought of you on some indifferent occasion frequently
implies more good will than you had reason to expect. You have
henceforth a higher motive for conduct. We do not know how many amiable
thoughts are current.


_Feb. 26. Friday._ My prickles or smoothness are as much a quality of
your hand as of myself. I cannot tell you what I am, more than a ray
of the summer's sun. What I am I am, and say not. Being is the great
explainer. In the attempt to explain, shall I plane away all the spines,
till it is no thistle, but a cornstalk?

If my world is not sufficient without thee, my friend, I will wait
till it is and then call thee. You shall come to a palace, not to an
almshouse.

       *       *       *       *       *

My homeliest thought, like the diamond brought from farthest within the
mine, will shine with the purest lustre.

Though I write every day, yet when I say a good thing it seems as if I
wrote but rarely.

       *       *       *       *       *

To be great, we do as if we would be tall merely, be longer than we
are broad, stretch ourselves and stand on tiptoe. But greatness is well
proportioned, unstrained, and stands on the soles of the feet.

       *       *       *       *       *

How many are waiting for health and warm weather! But they wait for none.

       *       *       *       *       *

In composition I miss the hue of the mind. As if we could be satisfied
with the dews of the morning and evening without their colors, or the
heavens without their azure.[220]

       *       *       *       *       *

This good book helps the sun shine in my chamber. The rays fall on its
page as if to explain and illustrate it.[221]

       *       *       *       *       *

I who have been sick hear cattle low in the street, with such a healthy
ear as prophesies my cure. These sounds lay a finger on my pulse to
some purpose. A fragrance comes in at all my senses which proclaims
that I am still of Nature the child. The threshing in yonder barn and
the tinkling of the anvil come from the same side of Styx with me. If
I were a physician I would try my patients thus. I would wheel them to
a window and let Nature feel their pulse. It will soon appear if their
sensuous existence is sound. These sounds are but the throbbing of some
pulse in me.[222]

       *       *       *       *       *

Nature seems to have given me these hours to pry into her private
drawers. I watch the shadow of the insensible perspiration rising from
my coat or hand on the wall. I go and feel my pulse in all the recesses
of the house and see if I am of force to carry a homely life and comfort
into them.


_Feb. 27. Saturday._ Life looks as fair at this moment as a summer's
sea, or a blond dress in a saffron light, with its sun and grass and
walled towns so bright and chaste, as fair as my own virtue which
would adventure therein. Like a Persian city or hanging gardens in the
distance, so washed in light, so untried, only to be thridded by clean
thoughts. All its flags are flowing, and tassels streaming, and drapery
flapping, like some gay pavilion. The heavens hang over it like some
low screen, and seem to undulate in the breeze.

Through this pure, unwiped hour, as through a crystal glass, I look out
upon the future, as a smooth lawn for my virtue to disport in. It shows
from afar as unrepulsive as the sunshine upon walls and cities, over
which the passing life moves as gently as a shadow. I see the course
of my life, like some retired road, wind on without obstruction into a
country maze.[223]

I am attired for the future so, as the sun setting presumes all men
at leisure and in contemplative mood,—and am thankful that it is
thus presented blank and indistinct. It still o'ertops my hope. My
future deeds bestir themselves within me and move grandly towards a
consummation, as ships go down the Thames. A steady onward motion I feel
in me, as still as that, or like some vast, snowy cloud, whose shadow
first is seen across the fields. It is the material of all things loose
and set afloat that makes my sea.

These various words are not without various meanings. The combined
voice of the race makes nicer distinctions than any individual. There
are the words "diversion" and "amusement." It takes more to amuse than
to divert. We must be surrendered to our amusements, but only turned
aside to our diversions. We have no will in the former, but oversee
the latter. We are oftenest diverted in the street, but amused in our
chambers. We are diverted from our engagements, but amused when we
are listless. We may be diverted from an amusement, and amused by a
diversion. It often happens that a diversion becomes our amusement, and
our amusement our employment.


_Feb. 28._ Nothing goes by luck in composition. It allows of no tricks.
The best you can write will be the best you are. Every sentence is
the result of a long probation. The author's character is read from
title-page to end. Of this he never corrects the proofs. We read it
as the essential character of a handwriting without regard to the
flourishes. And so of the rest of our actions; it runs as straight as
a ruled line through them all, no matter how many curvets about it. Our
whole life is taxed for the least thing well done; it is its net result.
How we eat, drink, sleep, and use our desultory hours, now in these
indifferent days, with no eye to observe and no occasion [to] excite
us, determines our authority and capacity for the time to come.


_March 3._ I hear a man blowing a horn this still evening, and it sounds
like the plaint of nature in these times. In this, which I refer to
some man, there is something greater than any man. It is as if the earth
spoke. It adds a great remoteness to the horizon, and its very distance
is grand, as when one draws back the head to speak. That which I now
hear in the west seems like an invitation to the east. It runs round the
earth as a whisper gallery. It is the spirit of the West calling to the
spirit of the East, or else it is the rattling of some team lagging in
Day's train. Coming to me through the darkness and silence, all things
great seem transpiring there. It is friendly as a distant hermit's
taper. When it is trilled, or undulates, the heavens are crumpled into
time, and successive waves flow across them.

It is a strangely healthy sound for these disjointed times. It is a
rare soundness when cow-bells and horns are heard from over the fields.
And now I see the beauty and full meaning of that word "sound." Nature
always possesses a certain sonorousness, as in the hum of insects, the
booming of ice, the crowing of cocks in the morning, and the barking of
dogs in the night, which indicates her sound state.[224] God's voice
is but a clear bell sound. I drink in a wonderful health, a cordial,
in sound. The effect of the slightest tinkling in the horizon measures
my own soundness. I thank God for sound; it always mounts, and makes
me mount. I think I will not trouble myself for any wealth, when I can
be so cheaply enriched. Here I contemplate to drudge that I may own a
farm—and may have such a limitless estate for the listening. All good
things are cheap: all bad are very dear.

       *       *       *       *       *

As for these communities, I think I had rather keep bachelor's hall
in hell than go to board in heaven. Do you think your virtue will be
boarded with you? It will never live on the interest of your money,
depend upon it. The boarder has no home. In heaven I hope to bake my
own bread and clean my own linen. The tomb is the only boarding-house
in which a hundred are served at once. In the catacomb we may dwell
together and prop one another without loss.


_March 4._ Ben Jonson says in his epigrams,—

     "He makes himself a thorough-fare of Vice."

This is true, for by vice the substance of a man is not changed, but
all his pores, and cavities, and avenues are prophaned by being made
the thoroughfares of vice. He is the highway of his vice. The searching
devil courses through and through him. His flesh and blood and bones
are cheapened. He is all trivial, a place where three highways of sin
meet. So is another the thoroughfare of virtue, and virtue circulates
through all his aisles like a wind, and he is hallowed.

       *       *       *       *       *

We reprove each other unconsciously by our own behavior. Our very
carriage and demeanor in the streets should be a reprimand that will go
to the conscience of every beholder. An infusion of love from a great
soul gives a color to our faults, which will discover them, as lunar
caustic detects impurities in water.

       *       *       *       *       *

The best will not seem to go contrary to others, but, as if _they_ could
afford to travel the same way, they go a parallel but higher course, a
sort of upper road. Jonson says,—

     "That to the vulgar canst thyself apply,
     Treading a better path not contrary."

Their way is a mountain slope, a river valley's course, a tide which
mingles a myriad lesser currents.


_March 5. Friday._ How can our love increase, unless our loveliness
increase also? We must securely love each other as we love God, with no
more danger that our love be unrequited or ill-bestowed. There is that
in my friend before which I must first decay and prove untrue. Love is
the least moral and the most. Are the best good in their love? or the
worst, bad?


_March 6._ An honest misunderstanding is often the ground of future
intercourse.


"THE SPHINX"[225]

_March 7, 8, 9, 10._ The Sphinx is man's insatiable and questioning
spirit, which still, as of old, stands by the roadside in us and
proposes the riddle of life to every passer. The ancients represented
this by a monster who was a riddle of herself, having a body composed of
various creatures, as if to hint that she had no individual existence,
but was nearly allied to and brooded over all. They made her devour
those who were unable to explain her enigmas, as we are devoured by
doubt, and struggle towards the light, as if to be assured of our lives.
For we live by confidence, and our bravery is in some moment when we are
certain to that degree that our certainty cannot be increased; as, when
a ray bursts through a gap in a cloud, it darts as far, and reaches the
earth as surely, as the whole sun would have done.

1. In the first four lines is described the mood in which the Sphinx
bestirs herself in us. We must look on the world with a drowsy and
half-shut eye, that it may not be too much in our eye, and rather stand
aloof from than within it. When we are awake to the real world, we are
asleep to the actual. The sinful drowse to eternity, the virtuous to
time. Menu says that the "supreme omnipresent intelligence" is "a spirit
which can only be conceived by a mind _slumbering_." Wisdom and holiness
always slumber; they are never active in the ways of the world. As in
our night-dreams we are nearest to awakening, so in our day-dreams
we are nearest to a supernatural awakening, and the plain and flat
satisfactoriness of life becomes so significant as to be questioned.

The Sphinx hints that in the ages her secret is kept, but in the
annihilation of ages alone is it revealed. So far from solving the
problem of life, Time only serves to propose and keep it in. Time
waits but for its solution to become eternity. Its lapse is measured
by the successive failures to answer the incessant question, and the
generations of men are the unskillful passengers devoured.

2. She hints generally at man's mystery. He knows only that he is, not
what, nor whence. Not only is he curiously and wonderfully wrought, but
with Dædalian intricacy. He is lost in himself as a labyrinth and has
no clue to get out by. If he could get out of his humanity, he would
have got out of nature. "Dædalian" expresses both the skill and the
inscrutable design of the builder.

The insolubleness of the riddle is only more forcibly expressed by the
lines,—

     "Out of sleeping a waking,
       Out of waking a sleep."

They express the complete uncertainty and renunciation of knowledge of
the propounder.

3, 4, 5, 6. In these verses is described the integrity of all animate
and inanimate things but man,—how each is a problem of itself and
not the solution of one and presides over and uses the mystery of the
universe as unhesitatingly as if it were the partner of God; how, by a
sort of _essential and practical faith_, each understands all, for to
see that we understand is to know that we misunderstand. Each natural
object is an end to itself. A brave, undoubting life do they all live,
and are content to be a part of the mystery which is God, and throw the
responsibility on man of explaining them and himself too.

3. The outlines of the trees are as correct as if ruled by God on the
sky. The motions of quadrupeds and birds Nature never thinks to mend,
but they are a last copy and the flourishes of His hand.

4. The waves lapse with such a melody on the shore as shows that they
have long been at one with Nature. Theirs is as perfect play as if
the heavens and earth were not. They meet with a sweet difference
and independently, as old playfellows. Nothing do they lack more than
the world. The ripple is proud to be a ripple and balances the sea.
The atoms, which are in such a continual flux, notwithstanding their
minuteness, have a certain essential valor and independence. They have
the integrity of worlds, and attract and repel firmly as such. The least
has more manhood than Democritus.

5. So also in Nature the perfection of the whole is the perfection of
the parts, and what is itself perfect serves to adorn and set off all
the rest. Her distinctions are but reliefs. Night veileth the morning
for the morning's sake, and the vapor adds a new attraction to the hill.
Nature looks like a conspiracy for the advantage of all her parts;
when one feature shines, all the rest seem suborned to heighten its
charm. In her circle each gladly gives precedence to the other. Day
gladly alternates with night. Behind these the vapor atones to the hill
for its interference, and this harmonious scene is the effect of that
at-one-ment.

6. In a sense the babe takes its departure from Nature as the grown man
his departure out of her, and so during its nonage is at one with her,
and as a part of herself. It is indeed the very flower and blossom of
Nature.

     "Shines the peace of all being
       Without cloud, in its eyes;
     And the _sum_ of the world
       In soft _miniature_ lies."[226]

To the charming consistency of the palm and thrush, this universal and
serene beauty is added, as all the leaves of the tree flower in the
blossom.

7. But alas, the fruit to be matured in these petals is fated to break
the stem which holds it to universal consistency. It passes _through
Nature_ to manhood, and becomes unnatural, without being as yet quite
supernatural. Man's most approved life is but conformity, not a simple
and independent consistency, which would make all things conform to it.
His actions do not adorn Nature nor one another, nor does she exist in
harmony but in contrast with them. She is not their willing scenery.
We conceive that if a true action were to be performed it would be
assisted by Nature, and perhaps be fondled and reflected many times as
the rainbow. The sun is a true light for the trees in a picture, but
not for the actions of men. They will not bear so strong a light as
the stubble; the universe has little sympathy with them, and sooner or
later they rebound hollowly on the memory. The April shower should be
as reviving to our life as to the garden and the grove, and the scenery
in which we live reflect our own beauty, as the dewdrop the flower. It
is the actual man, not the actual Nature, that hurts the romance of the
landscape. "He poisons the ground." The haymakers must be lost in the
grass of the meadow. They may be Faustus and Amyntas here, but near at
hand they are Reuben and Jonas. The woodcutter must not be better than
the wood, lest he be _worse_. Neither will bear to be considered as a
distinct feature. Man's works must lie in the bosom of Nature, cottages
be buried in trees, or under vines and moss, like rocks, that they
may not outrage the landscape. The hunter must be dressed in Lincoln
green, with a plume of eagle's feathers, to imbosom him in Nature.
So the skillful painter secures the distinctness of the whole by the
indistinctness of the parts. We can endure best to consider our repose
and silence. Only when the city, the hamlet, or the cottage is viewed
from a distance does man's life seem in harmony with the universe; but
seen closely his actions have no eagle's feathers or Lincoln green to
redeem them. The sunlight on cities at a distance is a deceptive beauty,
but foretells the final harmony of man with Nature.

Man as he is, is not the subject of any art, strictly speaking. The
naturalist pursues his study with love, but the moralist persecutes
his with hate. In man is the material of a picture, with a design
partly sketched, but Nature is such a picture drawn and colored. He is
a studio, Nature a gallery. If men were not idealists, no sonnets to
beautiful persons nor eulogies on worthy ones would ever be written.
We wait for the preacher to express _such_ love for his congregation as
the botanist for his herbarium.

8. Man, however, detects something in the lingering ineradicable
sympathy of Nature which seems to side with him against the stern
decrees of the soul. Her essential friendliness is only the more
apparent to his waywardness, for disease and sorrow are but a rupture
with her. In proportion as he renounces his will, she repairs his hurts,
and, if she burns, does oftener warm, if she freezes, oftener refreshes.
This is the motherliness which the poet personifies, and the Sphinx, or
wisely inquiring man, makes express a real concern for him. Nature shows
us a stern kindness, and only we are unkind. She endures long with us,
and though the severity of her law is unrelaxed, yet its evenness and
impartiality look relenting, and almost sympathize with our fault.

9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. But to the poet there are no riddles. They are
"pleasant songs" to him; his faith solves the enigmas which recurring
wisdom does not fail to repeat. Poetry is the only solution time can
offer. But the poet is soonest a pilgrim from his own faith. Our brave
moments may still be distinguished from our wise. Though the problem
is always solved for the soul, still does it remain to be solved by the
intellect. Almost faith puts the question, for only in her light can it
be answered. However true the answer, it does not prevent the question;
for the best answer is but plausible, and man can only tell his relation
to truth, but render no account of truth to herself.

9. Believe, and ask not, says the poet.

     "Deep love lieth under
       These pictures of time;
     They fade in the light of
       Their meaning sublime."

Nothing is plain but love.

10, 11, 12, 13. Man comes short, because he seeks perfection. He adorns
no world, while he is seeking to adorn a better. His best actions have
no reference to their actual scenery. For when our actions become of
that worth that they might confer a grace on Nature, they pass out of
her into a higher arena, where they are still mean and awkward. So that
the world beholds only the rear of great deeds, and mistakes them often
for inconsistencies, not knowing with what higher they consist. Nature
is beautiful as in repose, not promising a higher beauty to-morrow.
Her actions are level to one another, and so are never unfit or
inconsistent. Shame and remorse, which are so unsightly to her, have
a prospective beauty and fitness which redeem them. We would have our
lover to be nobler than we, and do not fear to sacrifice our love to
his greater nobleness. Better the disagreement of noble lovers than
the agreement of base ones. In friendship each will be nobler than the
other, and so avoid the cheapness of a level and idle harmony. Love will
have its chromatic strains,—discordant yearnings for higher chords,—as
well as symphonies. Let us expect no finite satisfaction.

13. Who looks in the sun will see no light else; but also he will see
no shadow. Our life revolves unceasingly, but the centre is ever the
same, and the wise will regard only the seasons of the soul.

14. The poet concludes with the same trust he began with, and jeers at
the blindness which could inquire. But our sphinx is so wise as to put
no riddle that can be answered. It is a great presumption to answer
conclusively a question which any sincerity has put. The wise answer
no questions,—nor do they ask them. She silences his jeers with the
conviction that she is the eye-beam of his eye. Our proper eye never
quails before an answer. To rest in a reply, as a response of the
oracle, that is error; but to suspect time's reply, because we would not
degrade one of God's meanings to be intelligible to us, that is wisdom.
We shall never arrive at his meaning, but it will ceaselessly arrive to
us. The truth we seek with ardor and devotion will not reward us with a
cheap acquisition. We run unhesitatingly in our career, not fearing to
pass any goal of truth in our haste. We career toward her eternally. A
truth rested in stands for all the vice of an age, and revolution comes
kindly to restore health.

16. The cunning Sphinx, who had been hushed into stony silence and
repose in us, arouses herself and detects a mystery in all things,—in
infancy, the moon, fire, flowers, sea, mountain,—and,

(17) in the spirit of the old fable, declares proudly,—

     "Who telleth one of my meanings
       Is master of all I am."

When some Œdipus has solved one of her enigmas, she will go dash her
head against a rock.

       *       *       *       *       *

You may find this as enigmatical as the Sphinx's riddle. Indeed, I doubt
if she could solve it herself.


_March 11. Thursday._ Every man understands why a fool sings.


_March 13. Saturday._ There is a sort of homely truth and naturalness in
some books, which is very rare to find, and yet looks quite cheap. There
may be nothing lofty in the sentiment, or polished in the expression,
but it is careless, countrified talk. The scholar rarely writes as
well as the farmer talks. Homeliness is a great merit in a book; it is
next to beauty and a high art. Some have this merit only. A few homely
expressions redeem them. Rusticity is pastoral, but affectation merely
civil. The scholar does not make his most familiar experience come
gracefully to the aid of his expression, and hence, though he live in
it, his books contain no tolerable pictures of the country and simple
life. Very few men can speak of Nature with any truth. They confer no
favor; they do not speak a good word for her. Most cry better than
they speak. You can get more nature out of them by pinching than by
addressing them. It is naturalness, and not simply good nature, that
interests. I like better the surliness with which the woodchopper
speaks of his woods, handling them as indifferently as his axe, than
the mealy-mouthed enthusiasm of the lover of nature. Better that the
primrose by the river's brim be a yellow primrose and nothing more, than
the victim of his bouquet or herbarium, to shine with the flickering
dull light of his imagination, and not the golden gleam of a star.

Aubrey relates of Thomas Fuller that his was "a very working head, in so
much, that walking and meditating before dinner, he would eat up a penny
loaf, not knowing that he did it. His natural memory was very great, to
which he added the art of memory. He would repeat to you forwards and
backwards all the signs from Ludgate to Charing-cross." These are very
good and wholesome facts to know of a man, as copious as some modern
volumes.

He also says of Mr. John Hales, that, "he loved Canarie" and was buried
"under an altar monument of black marble ... with a too long epitaph;"
of Edmund Halley, that he "at sixteen could make a dial, and then he
said he thought himself a brave fellow;" of William Holder, who wrote
a book upon his curing one Popham, who was deaf and dumb, "He was
beholding to no author; did only consult with nature." For the most
part an author but consults with all who have written before upon any
subject, and his book is but the advice of so many. But a true book will
never have been forestalled, but the topic itself will be new, and, by
consulting with nature, it will consult not only with those who have
gone before, but with those who may come after. There is always room
and occasion enough for a true book on any subject, as there is room for
more light the brightest day, and more rays will not interfere with the
first.[227]

How alone must our life be lived! We dwell on the seashore, and none
between us and the sea. Men are my merry companions, my fellow-pilgrims,
who beguile the way but leave me at the first turn in the road, for none
are travelling _one_ road so far as myself.

Each one marches in the van. The weakest child is exposed to the fates
henceforth as barely as its parents. Parents and relations but entertain
the youth; they cannot stand between him and his destiny. This is the
one bare side of every man. There is no fence; it is clear before him
to the bounds of space.

       *       *       *       *       *

What is fame to a living man? If he live aright, the sound of no man's
voice will resound through the aisles of his secluded life. His life is
a hallowed silence, a fane. The loudest sounds have to thank my little
ear that they are heard.


_March 15._ When I have access to a man's barrel of sermons, which were
written from week to week, as his life lapsed, though I now know him
to live cheerfully and bravely enough, still I cannot conceive what
interval there was for laughter and smiles in the midst of so much
sadness. Almost in proportion to the sincerity and earnestness of the
life will be the sadness of the record. When I reflect that twice a week
for so many years he pondered and preached such a sermon, I think he
must have been a splenetic and melancholy man, and wonder if his food
digested well. It seems as if the fruit of virtue was never a careless
happiness.

A great cheerfulness have all great wits possessed, almost a prophane
levity to such as understood them not, but their religion had the
broader basis in proportion as it was less prominent. The religion I
love is very laic. The clergy are as diseased, and as much possessed
with a devil, as the reformers. They make their topic as offensive as
the politician, for our religion is as unpublic and incommunicable
as our poetical vein, and to be approached with as much love and
tenderness.


_March 17. Wednesday._ The stars go up and down before my only eye.
Seasons come round to me alone. I cannot lean so hard on any arm as on
a sunbeam. So solid men are not to my sincerity as is the shimmer of
the fields.


_March 19. Friday._ No true and brave person will be content to live
on such a footing with his fellow and himself as the laws of every
household now require. The house is the very haunt and lair of our vice.
I am impatient to withdraw myself from under its roof as an unclean
spot. There is no circulation there; it is full of stagnant and mephitic
vapors.


_March 20._ Even the wisest and best are apt to use their lives as the
occasion to do something else in than to live greatly. But we should
hang as fondly over this work as the finishing and embellishment of a
poem.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a great relief when for a few moments in the day we can retire
to our chamber and be completely true to ourselves. It leavens the rest
of our hours. In that moment I will be nakedly as vicious as I am; this
false life of mine shall have a being at length.


_March 21. Sunday._ To be associated with others by my friend's
generosity when he bestows a gift is an additional favor to be grateful
for.


_March 27. Saturday._ Magnanimity, though it look expensive for a short
course, is always economy in the long run. Be generous in your poverty,
if you would be rich. To make up a great action there are no subordinate
mean ones. We can never afford to postpone a true life to-day to any
future and anticipated nobleness. We think if by tight economy we
can manage to arrive at independence, then indeed we will begin to be
generous without stay. We sacrifice all nobleness to a little present
meanness. If a man charges you eight hundred pay him eight hundred
and fifty, and it will leave a clean edge to the sum. It will be like
nature, overflowing and rounded like the bank of a river, not close and
precise like a drain or ditch.

       *       *       *       *       *

It is always a short step to peace—of mind.

       *       *       *       *       *

Under this line there is or has been life; as, when I see the mole's
raised gallery in the meadow, I know that he has passed underneath.

       *       *       *       *       *

I must not lose any of my freedom by being a farmer and landholder. Most
who enter on any profession are doomed men. The world might as well sing
a dirge over them forthwith. The farmer's muscles are rigid. He can do
one thing long, not many well. His pace seems determined henceforth;
he never quickens it. A very rigid Nemesis is his fate. When the right
wind blows or a star calls, I can leave this arable and grass ground,
without making a will or settling my estate. I would buy a farm as
freely as a silken streamer. Let me not think my front windows must face
east henceforth because a particular hill slopes that way. My life must
undulate still. I will not feel that my wings are clipped when once I
have settled on ground which the law calls my own, but find new pinions
grown to the old, and talaria to my feet beside.


_March 30. Tuesday._ I find my life growing slovenly when it does not
exercise a constant supervision over itself. Its duds accumulate. Next
to having lived a day well is a clear and calm overlooking of all our
days.


FRIENDSHIP

     Now we are partners in such legal trade,
     We'll look to the beginnings, not the ends,
     Nor to pay-day, knowing true wealth is made
     For current stock and not for dividends.

I am amused when I read how Ben Jonson engaged that the ridiculous masks
with which the royal family and nobility were to be entertained should
be "grounded upon antiquity and solid learning."[228]


ON THE SUN COMING OUT IN THE AFTERNOON

_April 1._

     Methinks all things have travelled since you shined,
     But only Time, and clouds, Time's team, have moved;
     Again foul weather shall not change my mind,
     But in the shade I will believe what in the sun I loved.

In reading a work on agriculture, I skip the author's moral reflections,
and the words "Providence" and "He" scattered along the page, to come at
the profitable level of what he has to say. There is no science in men's
religion; it does not teach me so much as the report of the committee on
swine. My author shows he has dealt in corn and turnips and can worship
God with the hoe and spade, but spare me his morality.[229]


_April 3._ Friends will not only live in harmony, but in melody.[230]


_April 4. Sunday._ The rattling of the tea-kettle below stairs reminds
me of the cow-bells I used to hear when berrying in the Great Fields
many years ago, sounding distant and deep amid the birches. That cheap
piece of tinkling brass which the farmer hangs about his cow's neck has
been more to me than the tons of metal which are swung in the belfry.

     They who prepare my evening meal below
     Carelessly hit the kettle as they go,
     With tongs or shovel,
     And, ringing round and round,
     Out of this hovel
     It makes an Eastern temple by the sound.

     At first I thought a cow-bell, right at hand
     'Mid birches, sounded o'er the open land,
     Where I plucked flowers
     Many years ago,
     Speeding midsummer hours
     With such secure delight they hardly seemed to flow.


_April 5._ This long series of desultory mornings does not tarnish the
brightness of the prospective days. Surely faith is not dead. Wood,
water, earth, air are essentially what they were; only society has
degenerated. This lament for a golden age is only a lament for golden
men.

       *       *       *       *       *

I only ask a clean seat. I will build my lodge on the southern slope
of some hill, and take there the life the gods send me. Will it not be
employment enough to accept gratefully all that is yielded me between
sun and sun?[231] Even the fox digs his own burrow. If my jacket and
trousers, my boots and shoes, are fit to worship God in, they will do.
Won't they, Deacon Spaulding?[232]


_April 7. Wednesday._ My life will wait for nobody, but is being matured
still irresistibly while I go about the streets and chaffer with this
man and that to secure it a living. It will cut its own channel, like
the mountain stream, which by the longest ridges and by level prairies
is not kept from the sea finally. So flows a man's life, and will
reach the sea water, if not by an earthy channel, yet in dew and rain,
overleaping all barriers, with rainbows to announce its victory. It
can wind as cunningly and unerringly as water that seeks its level; and
shall I complain if the gods make it meander? This staying to buy me a
farm is as if the Mississippi should stop to chaffer with a clamshell.

What have I to do with plows? I cut another furrow than you see. Where
the off ox treads, there is it not, it is farther off; where the nigh
ox walks, it will not be, it is nigher still. If corn fails, my crop
fails not. What of drought? What of rain? Is not my sand well clayed,
my peat well sanded? Is it not underdrained and watered?[233]

     My ground is high,
     But 'tis not dry,
     What you call dew
     Comes filtering through;
     Though in the sky,
     It still is nigh;
     Its soil is blue
     And virgin too.

       *       *       *       *       *

     If from your price ye will not swerve,
     Why, then I'll think the gods reserve
     A greater bargain there above,
     Out of their sup'rabundant love
     Have meantime better for me cared,
     And so will get my stock prepared,
     Plows of new pattern, hoes the same,
     Designed a different soil to tame,
     And sow my seed broadcast in air,
     Certain to reap my harvest there.


_April 8._ Friends are the ancient and honorable of the earth. The
oldest men did not begin friendship. It is older than Hindostan and the
Chinese Empire. How long has it been cultivated, and is still the staple
article! It is a divine league struck forever. Warm, serene days only
bring it out to the surface. There is a friendliness between the sun
and the earth in pleasant weather; the gray content of the land is its
color.

       *       *       *       *       *

You can tell what another's suspicions are by what you feel forced to
become. You will wear a new character, like a strange habit, in their
presence.


_April 9. Friday._ It would not be hard for some quiet brave man to leap
into the saddle to-day and eclipse Napoleon's career by a grander,—show
men at length the meaning of war. One reproaches himself with
supineness, that he too has sat quiet in his chamber, and not treated
the world to the sound of the trumpet; that the indignation which has
so long rankled in his breast does not take to horse and to the field.
The bravest warrior will have to fight his battles in his dreams, and
no earthly war note can arouse him. There are who would not run with
Leonidas. Only the third-rate Napoleons and Alexanders does history tell
of. The brave man does not mind the call of the trumpet nor hear the
idle clashing of swords without, for the infinite din within. War is but
a training, compared with the active service of his peace. Is he not at
war? Does he not resist the ocean swell within him, and walk as gently
as the summer's sea? Would you have him parade in uniform, and manœuvre
men, whose equanimity is his uniform and who is himself manœuvred?

       *       *       *       *       *

The times have no heart. The true reform can be undertaken any morning
before unbarring our doors. It calls no convention. I can do two thirds
the reform of the world myself. When two neighbors begin to eat corn
bread, who before ate wheat, then the gods smile from ear to ear, for
it is very pleasant to them. When an individual takes a sincere step,
then all the gods attend, and his single deed is sweet.[234]

       *       *       *       *       *

_April 10. Saturday._ I don't know but we should make life all too tame
if we had our own way, and should miss these impulses in a happier time.

       *       *       *       *       *

How much virtue there is in simply seeing! We may almost say that the
hero has striven in vain for his pre-eminency, if the student oversees
him. The woman who sits in the house and _sees_ is a match for a
stirring captain. Those still, piercing eyes, as faithfully exercised
on their talent, will keep her even with Alexander or Shakespeare. They
may go to Asia with parade, or to fairyland, but not beyond her ray.
We are as much as we see. Faith is sight and knowledge. The hands only
serve the eyes. The farthest blue streak in the horizon I can see, I
may reach before many sunsets. What I saw alters not; in my night, when
I wander, it is still steadfast as the star which the sailor steers by.

Whoever has had one thought quite lonely, and could contentedly digest
that in solitude, knowing that none could accept it, may rise to the
height of humanity, and overlook all living men as from a pinnacle.

       *       *       *       *       *

Speech never made man master of men, but the eloquently refraining from
it.


_April 11. Sunday._ A greater baldness my life seeks, as the crest of
some bare hill, which towns and cities do not afford. I want a directer
relation with the sun.


FRIENDSHIP'S STEADFASTNESS

     True friendship is so firm a league
     That's maintenance falls into the even tenor
     Of our lives, and is no tie,
     But the continuance of our life's thread.

     If I would safely keep this new-got pelf,
     I have no care henceforth but watch myself,
     For lo! it goes untended from my sight,
     Waxes and wanes secure with the safe star of night.

     See with what liberal step it makes its way,
     As we could well afford to let it stray
     Throughout the universe, with the sun and moon,
     Which would dissolve allegiance as soon.

     Shall I concern myself for fickleness,
     And undertake to make my friends more sure,
     When the great gods out of sheer kindliness,
     Gave me this office for a sinecure?

       *       *       *       *       *

     Death cannot come too soon
     Where it can come at all,
     But always is too late
     Unless the fates it call.


_April 15. Thursday._ The gods are of no sect; they side with no man.
When I imagine that Nature inclined rather to some few earnest and
faithful souls, and specially existed for them, I go to see an obscure
individual who lives under the hill, letting both gods and men alone,
and find that strawberries and tomatoes grow for him too in his garden
there, and the sun lodges kindly under his hillside, and am compelled
to acknowledge the unbribable charity of the gods.

Any simple, unquestioned mode of life is alluring to men. The man who
picks peas steadily for a living is more than respectable. He is to be
envied by his neighbors.


_April 16._ I have been inspecting my neighbors' farms to-day and
chaffering with the landholders, and I must confess I am startled to
find everywhere the old system of things so grim and assured. Wherever I
go the farms are run out, and there they lie, and the youth must buy old
land and bring it to. Everywhere the relentless opponents of reform are
a few old maids and bachelors, who sit round the kitchen fire, listening
to the singing of the tea-kettle and munching cheese-rinds.[235]


_April 18. Sunday._ We need pine for no office for the sake of a certain
culture, for all valuable experience lies in the way of a man's duty.
My necessities of late have compelled me to study Nature as she is
related to the farmer,—as she simply satisfies a want of the body.
Some interests have got a footing on the earth which I have not made
sufficient allowance for. That which built these barns and cleared the
land thus had some valor.[236]

       *       *       *       *       *

We take little steps, and venture small stakes, as if our actions were
very fatal and irretrievable. There is no swing to our deeds. But our
life is only a retired valley where we rest on our packs awhile. Between
us and our end there is room for any delay. It is not a short and easy
southern way, but we must go over snow-capped mountains to reach the
sun.


_April 20._ You can't beat down your virtue; so much goodness it must
have.

       *       *       *       *       *

When a room is furnished, comfort is not furnished.

       *       *       *       *       *

Great thoughts hallow any labor. To-day I earned seventy-five cents
heaving manure out of a pen, and made a good bargain of it. If the
ditcher muses the while how he may live uprightly, the ditching spade
and turf knife may be engraved on the coat-of-arms of his posterity.

       *       *       *       *       *

There are certain current expressions and blasphemous moods of viewing
things, as when we say "he is doing a good business," more prophane than
cursing and swearing. There is death and sin in such words. Let not the
children hear them.


_April 22. Thursday._ There are two classes of authors: the one write
the history of their times, the other their biography.


_April 23. Friday._ Any greatness is not to be mistaken. Who shall cavil
at it? It stands once for all on a level with the heroes of history. It
is not to be patronized. It goes alone.

       *       *       *       *       *

When I hear music, I flutter, and am the scene of life, as a fleet of
merchantmen when the wind rises.


_April 24._ Music is the sound of the circulation in nature's veins.
It is the flux which melts nature. Men dance to it, glasses ring and
vibrate, and the fields seem to undulate. The healthy ear always hears
it, nearer or more remote.

       *       *       *       *       *

It has been a cloudy, drizzling day, with occasional brightenings in
the mist, when the trill of the tree sparrow seemed to be ushering in
sunny hours.[237]


_April 25._ A momentous silence reigns always in the woods, and their
meaning seems just ripening into expression. But alas! they make no
haste. The rush sparrow,[238] Nature's minstrel of serene hours, sings
of an immense leisure and duration.

When I hear a robin sing at sunset, I cannot help contrasting the
equanimity of Nature with the bustle and impatience of man. We return
from the lyceum and caucus with such stir and excitement, as if a crisis
were at hand; but no natural scene or sound sympathizes with us, for
Nature is always silent and unpretending as at the break of day. She
but rubs her eyelids.

       *       *       *       *       *

I am struck with the pleasing friendships and unanimities of nature in
the woods, as when the moss on the trees takes the form of their leaves.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is all of civilized life in the woods. Their wildest scenes have
an air of domesticity and homeliness, and when the flicker's cackle is
heard in the clearings, the musing hunter is reminded that civilization
has imported nothing into them.[239] The ball-room is represented by
the catkins of the alder at this season, which hang gracefully like a
lady's ear-drops.

All the discoveries of science are equally true in their deepest
recesses; nature there, too, obeys the same laws. Fair weather and foul
concern the little red bug upon a pine stump; for him the wind goes
round the right way and the sun breaks through the clouds.[240]


_April 26. Monday._ At R. W. E.'s.

The charm of the Indian to me is that he stands free and unconstrained
in Nature, is her inhabitant and not her guest, and wears her easily
and gracefully. But the civilized man has the habits of the house. His
house is a prison, in which he finds himself oppressed and confined,
not sheltered and protected. He walks as if he sustained the roof; he
carries his arms as if the walls would fall in and crush him, and his
feet remember the cellar beneath. His muscles are never relaxed. It is
rare that he overcomes the house, and learns to sit at home in it, and
roof and floor and walls support themselves, as the sky and trees and
earth.

It is a great art to saunter.


_April 27._ It is only by a sort of voluntary blindness, and omitting
to see, that we know ourselves, as when we see stars with the side of
the eye. The nearest approach to discovering what we are is in dreams.
It is as hard to see one's self as to look backwards without turning
round. And foolish are they that look in glasses with that intent.

The porters have a hard time, but not so hard as he that carries his
own shoulders. That beats the Smyrna Turks. Some men's broad shoulders
are load enough. Even a light frame can stand under a great burden,
if it does not have to support itself. Virtue is buoyant and elastic;
it stands without effort and does not feel gravity; but sin plods and
shuffles. Newton needed not to wait for an apple to fall to discover
the attraction of gravitation; it was implied in the fall of man.


_April 28. Wednesday._ We falsely attribute to men a determined
character; putting together all their yesterdays and averaging them,
we presume we know them. Pity the man who has a character to support.
It is worse than a large family. He is silent poor indeed. But in
fact character is never explored, nor does it get developed in time,
but eternity is its development, time its envelope. In view of this
distinction, a sort of divine politeness and heavenly good breeding
suggests itself, to address always the enveloped character of a man. I
approach a great nature with infinite expectation and uncertainty, not
knowing what I may meet. It lies as broad and unexplored before me as
a scraggy hillside or pasture. I may hear a fox bark, or a partridge
drum, or some bird new to these localities may fly up. It lies out there
as old, and yet as new. The aspect of the woods varies every day, what
with their growth and the changes of the seasons and the influence of
the elements, so that the eye of the forester never twice rests upon
the same prospect. Much more does a character show newly and variedly,
if directly seen. It is the highest compliment to suppose that in the
intervals of conversation your companion has expanded and grown. It
may be a deference which he will not understand, but the nature which
underlies him will understand it, and your influence will be shed as
finely on him as the dust in the sun settles on our clothes. By such
politeness we may educate one another to some purpose. So have I felt
myself educated sometimes; I am expanded and enlarged.


_April 29._ Birds and quadrupeds pass freely through nature, without
prop or stilt. But man very naturally carries a stick in his hand,
seeking to ally himself by many points to nature, as a warrior stands by
his horse's side with his hand on his mane. We walk the gracefuler for
a cane, as the juggler uses a leaded pole to balance him when he dances
on a slack wire.

       *       *       *       *       *

Better a monosyllabic life than a ragged and muttered one; let its
report be short and round like a rifle, so that it may hear its own echo
in the surrounding silence.


_April 30._ Where shall we look for standard English but to the words
of any man who has a depth of feeling in him? Not in any smooth and
leisurely essay. From the gentlemanly windows of the country-seat no
sincere eyes are directed upon nature, but from the peasant's horn
windows a true glance and greeting occasionally. "For summer being
ended, all things," said the Pilgrim, "stood in appearance with a
weather-beaten face, and the whole country full of woods and thickets
represented a wild and savage hue." Compare this with the agricultural
report.


_May 1. Saturday._ Life in gardens and parlors is unpalatable to me. It
wants rudeness and necessity to give it relish. I would at least strike
my spade into the earth with as good will as the woodpecker his bill
into a tree.[241]


WACHUSETT[242]

_May 2._

     Especial I remember thee,
     Wachusett, who like me
     Standest alone without society.
     Thy far blue eye,
     A remnant of the sky,
     Seen through the clearing or the gorge,
     Or from the windows of the forge,
     Doth leaven all it passes by.
     Nothing is true
     But stands 'tween me and you,
     Thou western pioneer,
     Who know'st not shame nor fear,
     By venturous spirit driven
     Under the eaves of heaven;
     And canst expand thee there,
     And breathe enough of air?
     Upholding heaven, holding down earth,
     Thy pastime from thy birth,
     Not steadied by the one, nor leaning on the other;
     May I approve myself thy worthy brother!


_May 3. Monday._ We are all pilots of the most intricate Bahama
channels. Beauty may be the sky overhead, but Duty is the water
underneath. When I see a man with serene countenance in the sunshine of
summer, drinking in peace in the garden or parlor, it looks like a great
inward leisure that he enjoys; but in reality he sails on no summer's
sea, but this steady sailing comes of a heavy hand on the tiller. We
do not attend to larks and bluebirds so leisurely but that conscience
is as erect as the attitude of the listener. The man of principle gets
never a holiday. Our true character silently underlies all our words and
actions, as the granite underlies the other strata. Its steady pulse
does not cease for any deed of ours, as the sap is still ascending in
the stalk of the fairest flower.


_May 6. Thursday._ The fickle person is he that does not know what is
true or right absolutely,—who has not an ancient wisdom for a lifetime,
but a new prudence for every hour. We must sail by a sort of dead
reckoning on this course of life, not speak any vessel nor spy any
headland, but, in spite of all phenomena, come steadily to port at last.
In general we must have a catholic and universal wisdom, wiser than
any particular, and be prudent enough to defer to it always. We are
literally wiser than we know. Men do not fail for want of knowledge,
but for want of prudence to give wisdom the preference.[243] These low
weathercocks on barns and fences show not which way the general and
steady current of the wind sets,—which brings fair weather or foul,—but
the vane on the steeple, high up in another stratum of atmosphere, tells
that. What we need to know in any case is very simple.[244] I shall not
mistake the direction of my life; if I but know the high land and the
main,—on this side the Cordilleras, on that the Pacific,—I shall know
how to run. If a ridge intervene, I have but to seek, or make, a gap to
the sea.


_May 9. Sunday._ The pine stands in the woods like an Indian,—untamed,
with a fantastic wildness about it, even in the clearings. If an Indian
warrior were well painted, with pines in the background, he would seem
to blend with the trees, and make a harmonious expression. The pitch
pines are the ghosts of Philip and Massasoit. The white pine has the
smoother features of the squaw.

       *       *       *       *       *

The poet speaks only those thoughts that come unbidden, like the wind
that stirs the trees, and men cannot help but listen. He is not listened
to, but heard. The weathercock might as well dally with the wind as a
man pretend to resist eloquence. The breath that inspires the poet has
traversed a whole Campagna, and this new climate here indicates that
other latitudes are chilled or heated.

       *       *       *       *       *

Speak to men as to gods and you will not be insincere.


WESTWARD, HO!

     The needles of the pine
     All to the west incline.[245]


THE ECHO OF THE SABBATH BELL HEARD IN THE WOODS[246]

     Dong, sounds the brass in the east,
     As if for a civic feast,
     But I like that sound the best
     Out of the fluttering west.

     The steeple rings a knell,
     But the fairies' silvery bell
     Is the voice of that gentle folk,
     Or else the horizon that spoke.

     Its metal is not of brass,
     But air, and water, and glass,
     And under a cloud it is swung,
     And by the wind is rung,
     With a slim silver tongue.

     When the steeple tolls the noon,
     It soundeth not so soon,
     Yet it rings an earlier hour,
     And the sun has not reached its tower.


_May 10. Monday._ A good warning to the restless tourists of these days
is contained in the last verses of Claudian's "Old Man of Verona."

     "Erret, et extremos alter scrutetur Iberos.
     Plus habet hic vitae, plus habet ille viae."[247]


_May 23. Sunday._ Barn.—The distant woods are but the tassels of my eye.

Books are to be attended to as new sounds merely. Most would be put to
a sore trial if the reader should assume the attitude of a listener.
They are but a new note in the forest. To our lonely, sober thought the
earth is a wild unexplored. Wildness as of the jay and muskrat reigns
over the great part of nature. The oven-bird and plover are heard in the
horizon. Here is a new book of heroes, come to me like the note of the
chewink from over the fen, only over a deeper and wider fen. The pines
are unrelenting sifters of thought; nothing petty leaks through them.
Let me put my ear close, and hear the sough of this book, that I may
know if any inspiration yet haunts it. There is always a later edition
of every book than the printer wots of, no matter how recently it was
published. All nature is a new impression every instant.

       *       *       *       *       *

The aspects of the most simple object are as various as the aspects
of the most compound. Observe the same sheet of water from different
eminences. When I have travelled a few miles I do not recognize the
profile of the hills of my native village.


_May 27. Thursday._ I sit in my boat on Walden, playing the flute this
evening, and see the perch, which I seem to have charmed, hovering
around me, and the moon travelling over the bottom, which is strewn
with the wrecks of the forest, and feel that nothing but the wildest
imagination can conceive of the manner of life we are living. Nature is
a wizard. The Concord nights are stranger than the Arabian nights.

We not only want elbow-room, but eye-room in this gray air which shrouds
all the fields. Sometimes my eyes see over the county road by daylight
to the tops of yonder birches on the hill, as at others by moonlight.

Heaven lies above, because the air is deep.

       *       *       *       *       *

In all my life hitherto I have left nothing behind.


_May 31. Monday._ That title, "The Laws of Menu[248] with the Gloss of
Culluca," comes to me with such a volume of sound as if it had swept
unobstructed over the plains of Hindostan; and when my eye rests on
yonder birches, or the sun in the water, or the shadows of the trees, it
seems to signify the laws of them all. They are the laws of you and me,
a fragrance wafted down from those old times, and no more to be refuted
than the wind.

When my imagination travels eastward and backward to those remote years
of the gods, I seem to draw near to the habitation of the morning, and
the dawn at length has a place. I remember the book as an hour before
sunrise.

       *       *       *       *       *

We are height and depth both, a calm sea at the foot of a promontory.
Do we not overlook our own depths?


_June 1._ To have seen a man out of the East or West is sufficient to
establish their reality and locality. I have seen a Mr. Wattles to-day,
from Vermont, and now know where that is and that it is; a reformer,
with two soldier's eyes and shoulders, who began to belabor the world
at ten years, a ragged mountain boy, as fifer of a company, with set
purpose to remould it from those first years.

       *       *       *       *       *

The great person never wants an opportunity to be great, but makes
occasion for all about him.


_June 2. Wednesday._ I am brought into the near neighborhood and am
become a silent observer of the moon's paces to-night, by means of a
glass, while the frogs are peeping all around me on the earth, and the
sound of the accordion seems to come from some bright saloon yonder. I
am sure the moon floats in a human atmosphere. It is but a distant scene
of the world's drama. It is a wide theatre the gods have given us, and
our actions must befit it. More sea and land, mountain and valley, here
is,—a further West, a freshness and wildness in reserve when all the
land shall be cleared.

I see three little lakes between the hills near its edge, reflecting the
sun's rays. The light glimmers as on the water in a tumbler. So far off
do the laws of reflection hold. I seem to see the ribs of the creature.
This is the aspect of their day, its outside,—their heaven above their
heads, towards which they breathe their prayers. So much is between me
and them. It is noon there, perchance, and ships are at anchor in the
havens or sailing on the seas, and there is a din in the streets, and
in this light or that shade some leisurely soul contemplates.

But now dor-bugs fly over its disk and bring me back to earth and night.


_June 7. Monday._ The inhabitants of those Eastern plains seem to
possess a natural and hereditary right to be conservative and magnify
forms and traditions. "Immemorial custom is transcendent law," says
Menu. That is, it was the custom of gods before men used it. The fault
of our New England custom is that it is memorial. What is morality but
immemorial custom? It is not manner but character, and the conservative
conscience sustains it.[249]

We are accustomed to exaggerate the immobility and stagnation of those
eras, as of the waters which levelled the steppes; but those slow
revolving "years of the gods" were as rapid to all the needs of virtue
as these bustling and hasty seasons. Man stands to revere, he kneels
to pray. Methinks history will have to be tried by new tests to show
what centuries were rapid and what slow. Corn grows in the night.[250]
Will this bustling era detain the future reader longer? Will the earth
seem to have conversed more with the heavens during these times? Who
is writing better Vedas? How science and art spread and flourished,
how trivial conveniences were multiplied, that which is the gossip
of the world is not recorded in them; and if they are left out of our
scripture, too, what will remain?

Since the Battle of Bunker Hill we think the world has _not_ been at a
standstill.

When I remember the treachery of memory and the manifold accidents
to which tradition is liable, how soon the vista of the past closes
behind,—as near as night's crescent to the setting day,—and the dazzling
brightness of noon is reduced to the faint glimmer of the evening star,
I feel as if it were by a rare indulgence of the fates that any traces
of the past are left us,—that my ears which do not hear across the
interval over which a crow caws should chance to hear this far-travelled
sound. With how little coöperation of the societies, after all, is the
past remembered!

       *       *       *       *       *

I know of no book which comes to us with grander pretensions than
the "Laws of Menu;" and this immense presumption is so impersonal and
sincere that it is never offensive or ridiculous. Observe the modes in
which modern literature is advertised, and then consider this Hindoo
prospectus. Think what a reading public it addresses, what criticism it
expects. What wonder if the times were not ripe for it?[251]


_June 8._ Having but one chair, I am obliged to receive my visitors
standing, and, now I think of it, those old sages and heroes must always
have met erectly.


_July 10 to 12._ This town, too, lies out under the sky, a port of entry
and departure for souls to and from heaven.[252]

A slight sound at evening lifts me up by the ears, and makes life seem
inexpressibly serene and grand. It may be in Uranus, or it may be in
the shutter. It is the original sound of which all literature is but
the echo. It makes all fear superfluous. Bravery comes from further than
the sources of fear.


_Aug. 1. Sunday._ I never met a man who cast a free and healthy glance
over life, but the best live in a sort of Sabbath light, a Jewish
gloom. The best thought is not only without sombreness, but even without
morality. The universe lies outspread in floods of white light to it.
The moral aspect of nature is a jaundice reflected from man. To the
innocent there are no cherubim nor angels. Occasionally we rise above
the necessity of virtue into an unchangeable morning light, in which we
have not to choose in a dilemma between right and wrong, but simply to
live right on and breathe the circumambient air.[253] There is no name
for this life unless it be the very vitality of _vita_. Silent is the
preacher about this, and silent must ever be, for he who knows it will
not preach.


_Aug. 4. Wednesday._ My pen is a lever which, in proportion as the near
end stirs me further within, the further end reaches to a greater depth
in the reader.

       *       *       *       *       *

Nawshawtuct.—Far in the east I read _Nature's Corn Law Rhymes_. Here,
in sight of Wachusett and these rivers and woods, my mind goes singing
to itself of other themes than taxation. The rush sparrow sings still
unintelligible, as from beyond a depth in me which I have not fathomed,
where my future lies folded up. I hear several faint notes, quite
outside me, which populate the waste.

This is such fresh and flowing weather, as if the waves of the morning
had subsided over the day.


_Aug. 6._ If I am well, then I see well. The bulletins of health are
twirled along my visual rays, like pasteboards on a kite string.

I cannot read a sentence in the book of the Hindoos without being
elevated as upon the table-land of the Ghauts. It has such a rhythm
as the winds of the desert, such a tide as the Ganges, and seems as
superior to criticism as the Himmaleh Mounts. Even at this late hour,
unworn by time, with a native and inherent dignity it wears the English
dress as indifferently as the Sanscrit. The great tone of the book is
of such fibre and such severe tension that no time nor accident can
relax it.[254] The great thought is never found in a mean dress, but
is of virtue to ennoble any language. Let it issue from the lips of
the Wolofs, or from the forum of Rome, the nine Muses will seem to
have been purveyors for it. Its education is always liberal; it has
all the graces of oratory and of poetry. The lofty tone which is its
indispensable breath is grace to the eye and music to the ear. It can
endow a college.[255]

       *       *       *       *       *

So supremely religious a book imposes with authority on the latest
age. The very simplicity of style of the ancient lawgiver, implying
all in the omission of all, proves an habitual elevation of thought,
which the multiplied glosses of later days strive in vain to slope up
to. The whole book by noble gestures and inclinations seems to render
words unnecessary. The abbreviated sentence points to the thing for
explanation. As the sublimest thought is most faithfully printed in the
face, and needs the fewest interpreting words. The page nods toward the
fact and is silent.

As I walk across the yard from the barn to the house through the fog,
with a lamp in my hand, I am reminded of the Merrimack nights, and seem
to see the sod between tent-ropes. The trees, seen dimly through the
mist, suggest things which do not at all belong to the past, but are
peculiar to my fresh New England life. It is as novel as green peas.
The dew hangs everywhere upon the grass, and I breathe the rich, damp
air in slices.


_Aug. 7. Saturday._ The impression which those sublime sentences made on
me last night has awakened me before any cockcrowing. Their influence
lingers around me like a fragrance, or as the fog hangs over the earth
late into the day.

The very locusts and crickets of a summer day are but later or older
glosses on the Dherma Sástra of the Hindoos, a continuation of the
sacred code.[256]


_Aug. 9._ It is vain to try to write unless you feel strong in the
knees.

Any book of great authority and genius seems to our imagination to
permeate and pervade all space. Its spirit, like a more subtle ether,
sweeps along with the prevailing winds of the country. Its influence
conveys a new gloss to the meadows and the depths of the wood, and
bathes the huckleberries on the hills, as sometimes a new influence
in the sky washes in waves over the fields and seems to break on
some invisible beach in the air. All things confirm it. It spends the
mornings and the evenings.[257]

       *       *       *       *       *

Everywhere the speech of Menu demands the widest apprehension and
proceeds from the loftiest plateau of the soul. It is spoken unbendingly
to its own level, and does not imply any contemporaneous speaker.

       *       *       *       *       *

I read history as little critically as I consider the landscape, and
am more interested in the atmospheric tints and various lights and
shades which the intervening spaces create than in its groundwork
and composition. It is the morning now turned evening and seen in the
west,—the same sun, but a new light and atmosphere. Its beauty is like
the sunset; not a fresco painting on a wall, flat and bounded, but
atmospheric and roving, or free. But, in reality, history fluctuates as
the face of the landscape from morning to evening. What is of moment
in it is its hue and color. Time hides no treasures; we want not its
_then_, but its _now_. We do not complain that the mountains in the
horizon are blue and indistinct; they are the more like the heavens.

Of what moment are facts that can be lost,—which need to be
commemorated? The monument of death will outlast the memory of the dead.
The Pyramids do not tell the tale confided to them. The living fact
commemorates itself. Why look in the dark for light? Look in the light
rather. Strictly speaking, the Societies have not recovered one fact
from oblivion, but they themselves are instead of the fact that is lost.
The researcher is more memorable than the researched. The crowd stood
admiring the mist and the dim outline of the trees seen through it, and
when one of their number advanced to explore the phenomenon, with fresh
admiration all eyes were turned on his dimly retreating figure. Critical
acumen is exerted in vain to uncover the past; the _past_ cannot be
_presented_; we cannot know what we are not. But one veil hangs over
past, present, and future, and it is the province of the historian to
find out, not what was, but what is. Where a battle has been fought,
you will find nothing but the bones of men and beasts; where a battle
is being fought, there are hearts beating. We will sit on a mound and
muse, and not try to make these skeletons stand on their legs again.
Does Nature remember, think you, that they _were_ men, or not rather
that they _are_ bones?

Ancient history has an air of antiquity. It should be more modern. It
is written as if the spectator should be thinking of the back side of
the picture on the wall, as if the author expected the dead would be
his readers, and wished to detail to them their own experience. Men
seem anxious to accomplish an orderly retreat through the centuries,
earnestly rebuilding the works behind, as they are battered down by the
incroachments of time; but while they loiter, they and their works both
fall a prey to the enemy.

Biography is liable to the same objection; it should be autobiography.
Let us not leave ourselves empty that, so vexing our bowels, we may go
abroad and be somebody else to explain him. If I am not I, who will be?
As if it were to dispense justice to all. But the time has not come for
that.[258]


_Aug. 12._ We take pleasure in beholding the form of a mountain in the
horizon, as if by retiring to this distance we had then first conquered
it by our vision, and were made privy to the design of the architect;
so when we behold the shadow of our earth on the moon's disk. When
we climb a mountain and observe the lesser irregularities, we do not
give credit to the comprehensive and general intelligence which shaped
them; but when we see the outline in the horizon, we confess that the
hand which moulded those opposite slopes, making one balance the other,
worked round a deep centre, and was privy to the plan of the universe.
The smallest of nature's works fits the farthest and widest view, as if
it had been referred in its bearings to every point in space.[259] It
harmonizes with the horizon line and the orbits of the planets.


_Aug. 13. Friday._ I have been in the swamp by Charles Miles's this
afternoon, and found it so bosky and sylvan that Art would never have
freedom or courage to imitate it. It can never match the luxury and
superfluity of Nature. In Art all is seen; she cannot afford concealed
wealth, and in consequence is niggardly; but Nature, even when she
is scant and thin outwardly, contents us still by the assurance of a
certain generosity at the roots. Surely no stinted hand has been at work
here for these centuries to produce these particular tints this summer.
The double spruce attracts me here, which I had hardly noticed in the
gardens, and now I understand why men try to make them grow about their
houses.[260]

Nature has her luxurious and florid style as well as Art. Having a
pilgrim's cup to make, she gives to the whole—stem, bowl, handle, and
nose—some fantastic shape, as if it were to be the car of a fabulous
marine deity,—a Nereus or Triton. She is mythical and mystical always,
and spends her whole genius upon the least work.[261]


_Aug. 16._ There is a double virtue in the sound that can wake an echo,
as in the lowing of the cows this morning. Far out in the horizon that
sound travels quite round the town, and invades each recess of the wood,
advancing at a grand pace and with a sounding Eastern pomp.


_Aug. 18._ I sailed on the North River last night with my flute, and
my music was a tinkling stream which meandered with the river, and
fell from note to note as a brook from rock to rock. I did not hear
the strains after they had issued from the flute, but before they were
breathed into it, for the original strain precedes the sound by as much
as the echo follows after, and the rest is the perquisite of the rocks
and trees and beasts.[262] Unpremeditated music is the true gauge which
measures the current of our thoughts, the very undertow of our life's
stream.

       *       *       *       *       *

Of all the duties of life it is hardest to be in earnest; it implies a
good deal both before and behind. I sit here in the barn this flowing
afternoon weather, while the school bell is ringing in the village, and
find that all the things immediate to be done are very trivial. I could
postpone them to hear this locust sing. The cockerels crow and the hens
cluck in the yard as if time were dog-cheap. It seems something worth
detaining time,—the laying of an egg. Cannot man do something to comfort
the gods, and not let the world prove such a piddling concern? No doubt
they would be glad to sell their shares at a large discount by this
time. Eastern Railroad stock promises a better dividend.

The best poets, after all, exhibit only a tame and civil side of nature.
They have not seen the west side of any mountain.

Day and night, mountain and wood, are visible from the wilderness as
well as the village. They have their primeval aspects, sterner, savager
than any poet has sung. It is only the white man's poetry. We want the
Indian's report. Wordsworth is too tame for the Chippeway.[263]

       *       *       *       *       *

The landscape contains a thousand dials which indicate the natural
divisions of time; the shadows of a thousand styles point to the hour.
The afternoon is now far advanced, and a fresh and leisurely wind is
blowing on the river, causing long reaches of serene ripples. It has
done its stent, and seems not to flow but lie at its length reflecting
the light. The haze over the woods seems like the breath of all nature,
rising from a myriad pores into the attenuated atmosphere.[264] It is
sun smoke, the woof he has woven, his day's toil displayed.[265]

If I were awaked from a deep sleep, I should know which side the
meridian the sun might be by the chirping of the crickets. Night has
already insidiously set her foot in the valley in many places, where the
shadows of the shrubs and fences begin to darken the landscape. There
is a deeper shading in the colors of the afternoon landscape. Perhaps
the forenoon is brighter than the afternoon, not only because of the
greater transparency of the atmosphere then, but because we naturally
look most into the west,—as we look forward into the day,—and so in the
forenoon see the sunny side of things, but in the afternoon the shadow
of every tree.

What a drama of light and shadow from morning to night! Soon as the sun
is over the meridian, in deep ravines under the east side of the cliffs
night forwardly plants her foot, and, as day retreats, steps into his
trenches, till at length she sits in his citadel. For long time she
skulks behind the needles of the pine, before she dares draw out her
forces into the plain. Sun, moon, wind, and stars are the allies of one
side or the other.[266]

       *       *       *       *       *

How much will some officious men give to preserve an old book, of which
perchance only a single [copy] exists, while a wise God is already
giving, and will still give, infinitely more to get it destroyed!


_Aug. 20. Friday._ It seems as if no cock lived so far in the horizon
but a faint vibration reached me here, spread the wider over earth as
the more distant.

In the morning the crickets snore, in the afternoon they chirp, at
midnight they dream.


_Aug. 24._ Let us wander where we will, the universe is built round
about us, and we are central still. By reason of this, if we look into
the heavens, they are concave, and if we were to look into a gulf as
bottomless, it would be concave also. The sky is curved downward to
the earth in the horizon, because I stand in the plain. I draw down its
skirts. The stars so low there seem loth to go away from me, but by a
circuitous path to be remembering and returning to me.[267]


_Aug. 28. Saturday._ A great poet will write for his peers alone, and
indite no line to an inferior. He will remember only that he saw truth
and beauty from his position, and calmly expect the time when a vision
as broad shall overlook the same field as freely.[268]

Johnson can no more criticise Milton than the naked eye can criticise
Herschel's map of the sun.

       *       *       *       *       *

The art which only gilds the surface and demands merely a superficial
polish, without reaching to the core, is but varnish and filigree. But
the work of genius is rough-hewn from the first, because it anticipates
the lapse of time and has an ingrained polish, which still appears when
fragments are broken off, an essential quality of its substance. Its
beauty is its strength. It breaks with a lustre, and splits in cubes
and diamonds. Like the diamond, it has only to be cut to be polished,
and its surface is a window to its interior splendors.

       *       *       *       *       *

True verses are not counted on the poet's fingers, but on his
heart-strings.

     My life hath been the poem I would have writ,
     But I could not both live and live to utter it.[269]

In the Hindoo scripture the idea of man is quite illimitable and
sublime. There is nowhere a loftier conception of his destiny. He
is at length lost in Brahma himself, "the divine male." Indeed, the
distinction of races in this life is only the commencement of a series
of degrees which ends in Brahma.

The veneration in which the Vedas are held is itself a remarkable fact.
Their code embraced the whole moral life of the Hindoo, and in such a
case there is no other truth than sincerity. Truth is such by reference
to the heart of man within, not to any standard without. There is no
creed so false but faith can make it true.

In inquiring into the origin and genuineness of this scripture it is
impossible to tell when the divine agency in its composition ceased, and
the human began. "From fire, from air, and from the sun" was it "milked
out."

       *       *       *       *       *

There is no grander conception of creation anywhere. It is peaceful
as a dream,[270] and so is the annihilation of the world. It is such a
beginning and ending as the morning and evening, for they had learned
that God's methods are not violent. It was such an awakening as might
have been heralded by the faint dreaming chirp of the crickets before
the dawn.

The very indistinctness of its theogony implies a sublime truth. It does
not allow the reader to rest in any supreme first cause, but directly
hints of a supremer still which created the last. The creator is still
behind, increate.[271] The divinity is so fleeting that its attributes
are never expressed.


_Aug. 30._ What is a day, if the day's work be not done? What are the
divisions of time to them who have nothing to do? What is the present
or the future to him who has no occasion for them, who does not create
them by his industry?

       *       *       *       *       *

It is now easy to apply to this ancient scripture such a catholic
criticism as it will become the part of some future age to apply to the
Christian,—wherein the design and idea which underlies it is considered,
and not the narrow and partial fulfillment.

These verses are so eminently textual, that it seems as if those old
sages had concentrated all their wisdom in little fascicles, of which
future times were to be the commentary; as the light of this lower world
is only the dissipated rays of the sun and stars.[272] They seem to have
been uttered with a sober morning prescience, in the dawn of time.[273]
There is a sort of holding back, or withdrawal of the full meaning,
that the ages may follow after and explore the whole. The sentence opens
unexpensively and almost unmeaningly, as the petals of a flower.[274]

       *       *       *       *       *

To our nearsightedness this mere outward life seems a constituent part
of us, and we do not realize that as our soul expands it will cast off
the shell of routine and convention, which afterward will only be an
object for the cabinets of the curious. But of this people the temples
are now crumbled away, and we are introduced to the very hearth of
Hindoo life and to the primeval conventicle where how to eat and to
drink and to sleep were the questions to be decided.[275]

       *       *       *       *       *

The simple life herein described confers on us a degree of freedom even
in the perusal. We throw down our packs and go on our way unencumbered.
Wants so easily and gracefully satisfied that they seem like a more
refined pleasure and repleteness.[276]


_Sept. 1. Wednesday._ When I observe the effeminate taste of some of
my contemporaries in this matter of poetry, and how hardly they bear
with certain incongruities, I think if this age were consulted it would
not choose granite to be the backbone of the world, but Bristol spar or
Brazilian diamonds. But the verses which have consulted the refinements
even of a golden age will be found weak and nerveless for an iron one.
The poet is always such a Cincinnatus in literature as with republican
simplicity to raise all to the chiefest honors of the state.

Each generation thinks to inhabit only a west end of the world, and
have intercourse with a refined and civilized Nature, not conceiving
of her broad equality and republicanism. They think her aristocratic
and exclusive because their own estates are narrow. But the sun
indifferently selects his rhymes, and with a liberal taste weaves into
his verse the planet and the stubble.[277]

Let us know and conform only to the fashions of eternity.

       *       *       *       *       *

The very austerity of these Hindoos is tempting to the devotional
as a more refined and nobler luxury.[278] They seem to have indulged
themselves with a certain moderation and temperance in the severities
which their code requires, as divine exercises not to be excessively
used as yet. One may discover the root of a Hindoo religion in his own
private history, when, in the silent intervals of the day or the night,
he does sometimes inflict on himself like austerities with a stern
satisfaction.

The "Laws of Menu" are a manual of private devotion, so private and
domestic and yet so public and universal a word as is not spoken in
the parlor or pulpit in these days.[279] It is so impersonal that it
exercises our sincerity more than any other. It goes with us into the
yard and into the chamber, and is yet later spoken than the advice of
our mother and sisters.[280]


_Sept. 2. Thursday._ There is but one obligation, and that is the
obligation to obey the highest dictate. None can lay me under another
which will supersede this. The gods have given me these years without
any incumbrance; society has no mortgage on them. If any man assist
me in the way of the world, let him derive satisfaction from the deed
itself, for I think I never shall have dissolved my prior obligations
to God. Kindness repaid is thereby annulled. I would let his deed lie
as fair and generous as it was intended. The truly beneficent never
relapses into a creditor; his great kindness is still extended to
me and is never done. Of those noble deeds which have me for their
object I am only the most fortunate spectator, and would rather be the
abettor of their nobleness than stay their tide with the obstructions
of impatient gratitude. As true as action and reaction are equal, that
nobleness which was as wide as the universe will rebound not on him the
individual, but on the world. If any have been kind to me, what more do
they want? I cannot make them richer than they are. If they have not
been kind, they cannot take from me the privilege which they have not
improved. My obligations will be my lightest load, for that gratitude
which is of kindred stuff in me, expanding every pore, will easily
sustain the pressure. We walk the freest through the air we breathe.

       *       *       *       *       *

The sublime sentences of Menu carry us back to a time when purification
and sacrifice and self-devotion had a place in the faith of men, and
were not as now a superstition. They contain a subtle and refined
philosophy also, such as in these times is not accompanied with so lofty
and pure a devotion.

       *       *       *       *       *

I saw a green meadow in the midst of the woods to-day which looked as if
Dame Nature had set her foot there, and it had bloomed in consequence.
It was the print of her moccasin.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes my thought rustles in midsummer as if ripe for the fall.[281]
I anticipate the russet hues and the dry scent of autumn, as the
feverish man dreams of balm and sage.

       *       *       *       *       *

I was informed to-day that no Hindoo tyranny presided at the framing
of the world,—that I am a freeman of the universe, and not sentenced to
any caste.[282]

       *       *       *       *       *

When I write verses I serve my thoughts as I do tumblers; I rap them to
see if they will ring.


_Sept. 3. Friday._ Next to Nature, it seems as if man's actions were the
most natural, they so gently accord with her. The small seines of flax
or hemp stretched across the shallow and transparent parts of the river
are no more intrusion than the cobweb in the sun. It is very slight and
refined outrage at most. I stay my boat in mid-current and look down in
the running water to see the civil meshes of his nets, and wonder how
the blustering people of the town could have done this elvish work. The
twine looks like a new river-weed and is to the river like a beautiful
memento of man, man's presence in nature discovered as silently and
delicately as Robinson discovered that there [were] savages on his
island by a footprint in the sand.[283]

       *       *       *       *       *

Moonlight is the best restorer of antiquity. The houses in the village
have a classical elegance as of the best days of Greece, and this
half-finished church reminds me of the Parthenon, or whatever is most
famous and excellent in art.[284] So serene it stands, reflecting
the moon, and intercepting the stars with its rafters, as if it were
refreshed by the dews of the night equally with me. By day Mr. Hosmer,
but by night Vitruvius rather. If it were always to stand in this mild
and sombre light it would be finished already. It is in progress by day
but completed by night, and already its designer is an old master. The
projecting rafter so carelessly left on the tower, holding its single
way through the sky, is quite architectural, and in the unnecessary
length of the joists and flooring of the staging around the walls there
is an artistic superfluity and grace. In these fantastic lines described
upon the sky there is no trifling or conceit. Indeed, the staging for
the most part is the only genuine native architecture and deserves to
stand longer than the building it surrounds. In this obscurity there are
no fresh colors to offend, and the light and shade of evening adorn the
new equally with the old.


_Sept. 4. Saturday._ I think I could write a poem to be called
"Concord." For argument I should have the River, the Woods, the
Ponds, the Hills, the Fields, the Swamps and Meadows, the Streets and
Buildings, and the Villagers. Then Morning, Noon, and Evening, Spring,
Summer, Autumn, and Winter, Night, Indian Summer, and the Mountains in
the Horizon.

       *       *       *       *       *

A book should be so true as to be intimate and familiar to all men,
as the sun to their faces,—such a word as is occasionally uttered to a
companion in the woods in summer, and both are silent.

       *       *       *       *       *

As I pass along the streets of the village on the day of our annual
fair, when the leaves strew the ground, I see how the trees keep just
such a holiday all the year. The lively spirits of their sap mount
higher than any plowboy's let loose that day. A walk in the autumn
woods, when, with serene courage, they are preparing for their winter
campaign, if you have an ear for the rustling of their camp or an eye
for the glancing of their armor, is more inspiring than the Greek or
Peninsular war.[285] Any grandeur may find society as great as itself
in the forest.

       *       *       *       *       *

Pond Hill.—I see yonder some men in a boat, which floats buoyantly amid
the reflections of the trees, like a feather poised in mid-air, or a
leaf wafted gently from its twig to the water without turning over. They
seem very delicately to have availed themselves of the natural laws, and
their floating there looks like a beautiful and successful experiment
in philosophy. It reminds me how much more refined and noble the life
of man might be made, how its whole economy might be as beautiful as a
Tuscan villa,[286]—a new and more catholic art, the art of life, which
should have its impassioned devotees and make the schools of Greece and
Rome to be deserted.


_Sept. 5. Saturday._ Barn.

     Greater is the depth of sadness
     Than is any height of gladness.

I cannot read much of the best poetry in prose or verse without feeling
that it is a partial and exaggerated plaint, rarely a carol as free
as Nature's. That content which the sun shines for between morning and
evening is unsung. The Muse solaces herself; she is not delighted but
consoled.[287] But there are times when we feel a vigor in our limbs,
and our thoughts are like a flowing morning light, and the stream
of our life without reflection shows long reaches of serene ripples.
And if we were to sing at such an hour, there would be no catastrophe
contemplated in our verse, no tragic element in it,[288] nor yet a
comic. For the life of the gods is not in any sense dramatic, nor can
be the subject of the drama; it is epic without beginning or end, an
eternal interlude without plot,—not subordinate one part to another,
but supreme as a whole, at once leaf and flower and fruit. At present
the highest strain is Hebraic. The church bell is the tone of all
religious thought, the most musical that men consent to sing. In the
youth of poetry, men love to praise the lark and the morning, but they
soon forsake the dews and skies for the nightingale and evening shades.
Without instituting a wider comparison I might say that in Homer there
is more of the innocence and serenity of youth than in the more modern
and moral poets. The Iliad is not Sabbath but morning reading, and men
cling to this old song, because they have still moments of unbaptized
and uncommitted life which give them an appetite for more. There is no
cant in him, as there is no religion. We read him with a rare sense of
freedom and irresponsibleness, as though we trod on native ground, and
were autochthones of the soil.[289]

       *       *       *       *       *

Through the fogs of this distant vale we look back and upward to the
source of song, whose crystal stream still ripples and gleams in the
clear atmosphere of the mountain's side.

       *       *       *       *       *

Some hours seem not to be occasion for anything, unless for great
resolves to draw breath and repose in, so religiously do we postpone
all action therein. We do not straight go about to execute our thrilling
purpose, but shut our doors behind us, and saunter with prepared mind,
as if the half were already done.[290]

Sometimes a day serves only to hold time together.[291]


_Sept. 12. Sunday._

     Where I have been
     There was none seen.


_Sept. 14._ No bravery is to be named with that which can face its own
deeds.

       *       *       *       *       *

In religion there is no society.

       *       *       *       *       *

Do not dissect a man till he is dead.

       *       *       *       *       *

Love does not analyze its object.

       *       *       *       *       *

We do not know the number of muscles in a caterpillar dead; much less
the faculties of a man living.

       *       *       *       *       *

You must believe that I know before you can tell me.

       *       *       *       *       *

To the highest communication I can make no reply; I lend only a silent
ear.


_Sept. 18. Saturday._ Barn.—It is a great event, the hearing of a bell
ring in one of the neighboring towns, particularly in the night. It
excites in me an unusual hilarity, and I feel that I am in season wholly
and enjoy a prime and leisure hour.


_Sept. 20. Monday._ Visited Sampson Wilder of Boston. His method of
setting out peach trees is as follows:—

Dig a hole six feet square and two deep, and remove the earth; cover
the bottom to the depth of six inches with lime and ashes in equal
proportions, and upon this spread another layer of equal thickness, of
horn parings, tips of horns, bones, and the like, then fill up with a
compost of sod and strong animal manure, say four bushels of hog manure
to a cartload of sod. Cover the tree—which should be budded at two years
old—but slightly, and at the end of two years dig a trench round it
three feet from the tree and six inches deep, and fill it with lime and
ashes.

For grapes:—

Let your trench be twelve feet wide and four deep, cover the bottom
with paving-stones six inches, then old bricks with mortar attached or
loose six inches more, then beef-bones, horns, etc., six more (Captain
Bobadil), then a compost similar to the preceding. Set your roots one
foot from the north side, the trench running east and west, and bury
eight feet of the vine crosswise the trench, not more than eight inches
below the surface. Cut it down for three or four years, that root may
accumulate, and then train it from the sun up an inclined plane.


_Sept. 28. Tuesday._ I anticipate the coming in of spring as a child
does the approach of some pomp through a gate of the city.


_Sept. 30._

     Better wait
     Than be too late.[292]


_Nov. 29. Cambridge._—One must fight his way, after a fashion, even in
the most civil and polite society. The most truly kind and gracious have
to be won by a sort of valor, for the seeds of suspicion seem to lurk in
every spadeful of earth, as well as those of confidence. The president
and librarian turn the cold shoulder to your application, though they
are known for benevolent persons. They wonder if you can be anything but
a thief, contemplating frauds on the library. It is the instinctive and
salutary principle of self-defense; that which makes the cat show her
talons when you take her by the paw.[293]

Certainly that valor which can open the hearts of men is superior to
that which can only open the gates of cities.[294]

You must always let people see that they serve themselves more than
you,—not by your ingratitude, but by sympathy and congratulation.

       *       *       *       *       *

The twenty-first volume of Chalmers's English Poets contains Hoole's
and Mickle's Translations. In the shape of a note to the Seventh Book
of the Lusiad, Mickle has written a long "Inquiry into the Religious
Tenets and Philosophy of the Bramins."


_Nov. 30. Tuesday._ Cambridge.—When looking over the dry and dusty
volumes of the English poets, I cannot believe that those fresh and
fair creations I had imagined are contained in them. English poetry
from Gower down, collected into one alcove, and so from the library
window compared with the commonest nature, seems very mean. Poetry
cannot breathe in the scholar's atmosphere. The Aubreys and Hickeses,
with all their learning, prophane it yet indirectly by their zeal. You
need not envy his feelings who for the first time has cornered up poetry
in an alcove. I can hardly be serious with myself when I remember that
I have come to Cambridge after poetry; and while I am running over
the catalogue and collating and selecting, I think if it would not be
a shorter way to a complete volume to step at once into the field or
wood, with a very low reverence to students and librarians. Milton did
not foresee what company he was to fall into.[295] On running over the
titles of these books, looking from time to time at their first pages
or farther, I am oppressed by an inevitable sadness. One must have come
into a library by an oriel window, as softly and undisturbed as the
light which falls on the books through a stained window, and not by the
librarian's door, else all his dreams will vanish. Can the Valhalla be
warmed by steam and go by clock and bell?

Good poetry seems so simple and natural a thing that when we meet it we
wonder that all men are not always poets. Poetry is nothing but healthy
speech. Though the speech of the poet goes to the heart of things,
yet he is that one especially who speaks civilly to Nature as a second
person and in some sense is the patron of the world. Though more than
any he stands in the midst of Nature, yet more than any he can stand
aloof from her. The best lines, perhaps, only suggest to me that that
man simply saw or heard or felt what seems the commonest fact in my
experience.

One will know how to appreciate Chaucer best who has come down to
him the natural way through the very meagre pastures of Saxon and
ante-Chaucerian poetry. So human and wise he seems after such diet that
we are as liable to misjudge him so as usually.[296]

       *       *       *       *       *

The Saxon poetry extant seems of a more serious and philosophical cast
than the very earliest that can be called English. It has more thought,
but less music. It translates Boëthius, it paraphrases the Hebrew Bible,
it solemnly sings of war, of life and death, and chronicles events.
The earliest English poetry is tinctured with romance through the
influence of the Normans, as the Saxon was not. The ballad and metrical
romance belong to this period. Those old singers were for the most part
imitators or translators.[297] Or will it not appear, when viewed at
a sufficient distance, that our brave new poets are also secondary as
they, and refer the eye that reads them and their poetry, too, back and
backward without end?

       *       *       *       *       *

Nothing is so attractive and unceasingly curious as character. There
is no plant that needs such tender treatment, there is none that will
endure so rough. It is the violet and the oak. It is the thing we mean,
let us say what we will. We mean our own character, or we mean yours.
It is divine and related to the heavens, as the earth is by the flashes
of the Aurora. It has no acquaintance nor companion. It goes silent
and unobserved longer than any planet in space, but when at length it
does show itself, it seems like the flowering of all the world, and
its before unseen orbit is lit up like the trail of a meteor. I hear
no good news ever but some trait of a noble character. It reproaches me
plaintively. I am mean in contrast, but again am thrilled and elevated
that I can see my own meanness, and again still, that my own aspiration
is realized in that other. You reach me, my friend, not by your kind or
wise words to me here or there; but as you retreat, perhaps after years
of vain familiarity, some gesture or unconscious action in the distance
speaks to me with more emphasis than all those years. I am not concerned
to know what eighth planet is wandering in space up there, or when Venus
or Orion rises, but if, in any cot to east or west and set behind the
woods, there is any planetary character illuminating the earth.

     Packed in my mind lie all the clothes
     Which outward nature wears,
     For, as its hourly fashions change,
     It all things else repairs.

     My eyes look inward, not without,
     And I but hear myself,
     And this new wealth which I have got
     Is part of my own pelf.

     For while I look for change abroad,
     I can no difference find,
     Till some new ray of peace uncalled
     Lumines my inmost mind,

     As, when the sun streams through the wood,
     Upon a winter's morn,
     Where'er his silent beams may stray
     The murky night is gone.

     How could the patient pine have known
     The morning breeze would come,
     Or simple flowers anticipate
     The insect's noonday hum,

     Till that new light with morning cheer
     From far streamed through the aisles,
     And nimbly told the forest trees
     For many stretching miles?[298]


_[Dec.] 12. Sunday._ All music is only a sweet striving to express
character. Now that lately I have heard of some traits in the character
of a fair and earnest maiden whom I had only known superficially, but
who has gone hence to make herself more known by distance, they sound
like strains of a wild harp music. They make all persons and places
who had thus forgotten her to seem late and behindhand. Every maiden
conceals a fairer flower and more luscious fruit than any calyx in the
field, and if she go with averted face, confiding in her own purity and
high resolves, she will make the heavens retrospective, and all nature
will humbly confess its queen.[299]

There is apology enough for all the deficiency and shortcoming in the
world in the patient waiting of any bud of character to unfold itself.

Only character can command our reverent love. It is all mysteries in
itself.

     What is it gilds the trees and clouds
     And paints the heavens so gay,
     But yonder fast-abiding light
     With its unchanging ray?


     I've felt within my inmost soul
     Such cheerful morning news,
     In the horizon of my mind
     I've seen such morning hues,

     As in the twilight of the dawn,
     When the first birds awake,
     Is heard within some silent wood
     Where they the small twigs break;

     Or in the eastern skies is seen
     Before the sun appears,
     Foretelling of the summer heats
     Which far away he bears.

P. M. Walden.—I seem to discern the very form of the wind when, blowing
over the hills, it falls in broad flakes upon the surface of the pond,
this subtle element obeying the same law with the least subtle. As it
falls it spreads itself like a mass of lead dropped upon an anvil. I
cannot help being encouraged by this blithe activity in the elements in
these degenerate days of men. Who hears the rippling of the rivers will
not utterly despair of anything. The wind in the wood yonder sounds like
an incessant waterfall, the water dashing and roaring among rocks.


_[Dec.] 13. Monday._ We constantly anticipate repose. Yet it surely
can only be the repose that is in entire and healthy activity. It must
be a repose without rust. What is leisure but opportunity for more
complete and entire action? Our energies pine for exercise. That time
we spend in our duties is so much leisure, so that there is no man but
has sufficient of it.

I make my own time, I make my own terms. I cannot see how God or Nature
can ever get the start of me.

       *       *       *       *       *

This ancient Scotch poetry, at which its contemporaries so marvelled,
sounds like the uncertain lisping of a child. When man's speech
flows freest it but stutters and stammers. There is never a free and
clear deliverance; but, read now when the illusion of smooth verse
is destroyed by the antique spelling, the sense is seen to stammer
and stumble all the plainer. To how few thoughts do all these sincere
efforts give utterance! An hour's conversation with these men would have
done more. I am astonished to find how meagre that diet is which has fed
so many men. The music of sound, which is all-sufficient at first, is
speedily lost, and then the fame of the poet must rest on the music of
the sense. A great philosophical and moral poet would give permanence
to the language by making the best sound convey the best sense.


_[Dec.] 14. Tuesday._ To hear the sunset described by the old Scotch
poet Douglas, as I have seen it, repays me for many weary pages of
antiquated Scotch. Nothing so restores and humanizes antiquity and makes
it blithe as the discovery of some natural sympathy between it and the
present. Why is it that there is something melancholy in antiquity? We
forget that it had any other future than our present. As if it were not
as near to _the_ future as ourselves! No, thank heavens, these ranks of
men to right and left, posterity and ancestry, are not to be thridded by
any earnest mortal. The heavens stood over the heads of our ancestors as
near as to us. Any living word in their books abolishes the difference
of time. It need only be considered from the present standpoint.


_[Dec.] 15. Wednesday._ A mild summer sun shines over forest and lake.
The earth looks as fair this morning as the Valhalla of the gods.
Indeed our spirits never go beyond nature. In the woods there is an
inexpressible happiness. Their mirth is but just repressed. In winter,
when there is but one green leaf for many rods, what warm content is in
them! They are not rude, but tender, even in the severest cold. Their
nakedness is their defense. All their sounds and sights are elixir to my
spirit. They possess a divine health. God is not more well. Every sound
is inspiriting and fraught with the same mysterious assurance, from the
creaking of the boughs in January to the soft sough of the wind in July.

How much of my well-being, think you, depends on the condition of my
lungs and stomach,—such cheap pieces of Nature as they, which, indeed,
she is every day reproducing with prodigality. Is the arrow indeed fatal
which rankles in the breast of the bird on the bough, in whose eye all
this fair landscape is reflected, and whose voice still echoes through
the wood?

The trees have come down to the bank to see the river go by. This
old, familiar river is renewed each instant; only the channel is the
same.[300] The water which so calmly reflects the fleeting clouds and
the primeval trees I have never seen before. It may have washed some
distant shore, or framed a glacier or iceberg at the north, when I last
stood here. Seen through a mild atmosphere, the works of the husbandman,
his plowing and reaping, have a beauty to the beholder which the laborer
never sees.[301]

I seem to see somewhat more of my own kith and kin in the lichens on
the rocks than in any books. It does seem as if mine were a peculiarly
wild nature, which so yearns toward all wildness. I know of no redeeming
qualities in me but a sincere love for some things, and when I am
reproved I have to fall back on to this ground.[302] This is my argument
in reserve for all cases. My love is invulnerable. Meet me on that
ground, and you will find me strong. When I am condemned, and condemn
myself utterly, I think straightway, "But I rely on my love for some
things." Therein I am whole and entire. Therein I am God-propped.

When I see the smoke curling up through the woods from some farmhouse
invisible, it is more suggestive of the poetry of rural and domestic
life than a nearer inspection can be. Up goes the smoke as quietly as
the dew exhales in vapor from these pine leaves and oaks; as busy,
disposing itself in circles and in wreaths, as the housewife on the
hearth below. It is cotemporary with a piece of human biography, and
waves as a feather in some _man's_ cap. Under that rod of sky there is
some plot a-brewing, some ingenuity has planted itself, and we shall see
what it will do. It tattles of more things than the boiling of the pot.
It is but one of man's breaths. All that is interesting in history or
fiction is transpiring beneath that cloud. The subject of all life and
death, of happiness and grief, goes thereunder.

  [Illustration: _Winter Landscape from Fair Haven Hill_]

When the traveller in the forest, attaining to some eminence, descries a
column of smoke in the distance, it is a very gentle hint to him of the
presence of man. It seems as if it would establish friendly relations
between them without more ado.[303]


_[Dec.] 18. Saturday._ Some men make their due impression upon their
generation, because a petty occasion is enough to call forth all their
energies; but are there not others who would rise to much higher levels,
whom the world has never provoked to make the effort? I believe there
are men now living who have never opened their mouths in a public
assembly, in whom nevertheless there is such a well of eloquence that
the appetite of any age could never exhaust it; who pine for an occasion
worthy of them, and will pine till they are dead; who can admire, as
well as the rest, at the flowing speech of the orator, but do yet miss
the thunder and lightning and visible sympathy of the elements which
would garnish their own utterance.

If in any strait I see a man fluttered and his ballast gone, then I
lose all hope of him, he is undone; but if he reposes still, though he
do nothing else worthy of him, if he is still a man in reserve, then is
there everything to hope of him. The age may well go pine itself that it
cannot put to use this gift of the gods. He lives on, still unconcerned,
not needing to be used. The greatest occasion will be the slowest to
come.

       *       *       *       *       *

Sometimes a particular body of men do unconsciously assert that their
will is fate, that the right is decided by their fiat without appeal,
and when this is the case they can never be mistaken; as when one man is
quite silenced by the thrilling eloquence of another, and submits to be
neglected as to his fate, because such is not the willful vote of the
assembly, but their instinctive decision.


_Dec. 23. Thursday._ Concord.—The best man's spirit makes a fearful
sprite to haunt his tomb. The ghost of a priest is no better than that
of a highwayman. It is pleasant to hear of one who has blest whole
regions after his death by having frequented them while alive, who has
prophaned or tabooed no place by being buried in it.[304] It adds not
a little to the fame of Little John that his grave was long "celebrous
for the yielding of excellent whetstones."[305]

A forest is in all mythologies a sacred place, as the oaks among the
Druids and the grove of Egeria; and even in more familiar and common
life a celebrated wood is spoken of with respect, as "Barnsdale Wood"
and "Sherwood." Had Robin Hood no Sherwood to resort [to], it would
be difficult to invest his story with the charms it has got. It is
always the tale that is untold, the deeds done and the life lived in
the unexplored secrecy of the wood, that charm us and make us children
again,—to read his ballads, and hear of the greenwood tree.


_Dec. 24. Friday._ I want to go soon and live away by the pond, where I
shall hear only the wind whispering among the reeds. It will be success
if I shall have left myself behind. But my friends ask what I will do
when I get there. Will it not be employment enough to watch the progress
of the seasons?[306]


_Dec. 25. Saturday._ It does seem as if Nature did for a long time
gently overlook the prophanity of man. The wood still kindly echoes
the strokes of the axe, and when the strokes are few and seldom, they
add a new charm to a walk. All the elements strive to _naturalize_ the
sound.[307]

Such is our sympathy with the seasons that we experience the same degree
of heat in the winter as in the summer.

It is not a true apology for any coarseness to say that it is natural.
The grim woods can afford to be very delicate and perfect in the
details.

I don't want to feel as if my life were a sojourn any longer. That
philosophy cannot be true which so paints it. It is time now that I
begin to live.


_Dec. 26. Sunday._ He is the rich man and enjoys the fruits of riches,
who, summer and winter forever, can find delight in the contemplation
of his soul. I could look as unweariedly up to that cope as into the
heavens of a summer day or a winter night. When I hear this bell ring,
I am carried back to years and Sabbaths when I was newer and more
innocent, I fear, than now, and it seems to me as if there were a world
within a world. Sin, I am sure, is not in overt acts or, indeed, in acts
of any kind, but is in proportion to the time which has come behind us
and displaced eternity,—that degree to which our elements are mixed with
the elements of the world. The whole duty of life is contained in the
question how to respire and aspire both at once.


_Dec. 29. Wednesday._ One does not soon learn the trade of life. That
one may work out a true life requires more art and delicate skill than
any other work. There is need of the nice fingers of the girl as well
as the tough hand of the farmer. The daily work is too often toughening
the pericarp of the heart as well as the hand. Great familiarity with
the world must be nicely managed, lest it win away and bereave us of
some susceptibility. Experience bereaves us of our innocence; wisdom
bereaves us of our ignorance. Let us walk in the world without learning
its ways. Whole weeks or months of my summer life slide away in thin
volumes like mist or smoke, till at length some warm morning, perchance,
I see a sheet of mist blown down the brook to the swamp, its shadow
flitting across the fields, which have caught a new significance from
that accident; and as that vapor is raised above the earth, so shall
the next weeks be elevated above the plane of the actual;[308] or when
the setting sun slants across the pastures, and the cows low to my
inward ear and only enhance the stillness, and the eve is as the dawn,
a beginning hour and not a final one, as if it would never have done,
with its clear western amber inciting men to lives of as limpid purity.
Then do other parts of my day's work shine than I had thought at noon,
for I discover the real purport of my toil, as, when the husbandman has
reached the end of the furrow and looks back, he can best tell where
the pressed earth shines most.[309]

       *       *       *       *       *

All true greatness runs as level a course, and is as unaspiring, as
the plow in the furrow. It wears the homeliest dress and speaks the
homeliest language. Its theme is gossamer and dew lines, johnswort
and loosestrife, for it has never stirred from its repose and is most
ignorant of foreign parts. Heaven is the inmost place. The good have
not to travel far. What cheer may we not derive from the thought that
our courses do not diverge, and we wend not asunder, but as the web of
destiny is woven it [is] fulled, and we are cast more and more into the
centre! And our fates even are social.[310] There is no wisdom which can
take [the] place of humanity, and I find that in old Chaucer that love
rings longest which rhymes best with some saw of Milton's or Edmunds's.
I wish I could be as still as God is. I can recall to my mind the
stillest summer hour, in which the grasshopper sings over the mulleins,
and there is a valor in that time the memory of which is armor that can
laugh at any blow of fortune. A man should go out [of] nature with the
chirp of the cricket or the trill of the veery ringing in his ear. These
earthly sounds should only die away for a season, as the strains of the
harp rise and swell. Death is that expressive pause in the music of the
blast.[311] I would be as clean as ye, O woods. I shall not rest till
I be as innocent as you. I know that I shall sooner or later attain to
an unspotted innocence, for when I consider that state even now I am
thrilled.

If we were wise enough, we should see to what virtue we were indebted
for any happier moment we might have, nor doubt we had earned this at
some time.

These motions everywhere in nature must surely [be] the circulations of
God. The flowing sail, the running stream, the waving tree, the roving
wind,—whence else their infinite health and freedom?[312] I can see
nothing so proper and holy as unrelaxed play and frolic in this bower
God has built for us. The suspicion of sin never comes to this thought.
Oh, if men felt this they would never build temples even of marble
or diamond, but it would be sacrilege and prophane, but disport them
forever in this paradise.

In the coldest day it melts somewhere.

It seems as if only one trait, one little incident in human biography,
need to be said or written in some era, that all readers may go mad
after it, and the man who did the miracle is made a demigod henceforth.
What we all do, not one can tell; and when some lucky speaker utters a
truth of our experience and not of our speculation, we think he must
have had the nine Muses and the three Graces to help him. I can at
length stretch me when I come to Chaucer's breadth; and I think, "Well,
I could be _that_ man's acquaintance,"[313] for he walked in that low
and retired way that I do, and was not too good to live. I am grieved
when they hint of any unmanly submissions he may have made, for that
subtracts from his breadth and humanity.


_Dec. 30. Thursday._ I admire Chaucer for a sturdy English wit. The easy
height he speaks from in his Prologue to the Canterbury Tales is as good
as anything in it,—as if he were indeed better than any of the company
there assembled.[314]

The poet does not have to go out of himself and cease to tattle of his
domestic affairs, to win our confidence, but is so broad that we see no
limits to his sympathy.

Great delicacy and gentleness of character is constantly displayed in
Chaucer's verse. The simplest and humblest words come readily to his
lips. The natural innocence of the man appears in the simple and pure
spirit in which "The Prioresses Tale" is conceived, in which the child
sings _O alma redemptoris mater_, and in the account of the departure of
Custance with her child upon the sea, in "The Man of Lawes Tale."[315]
The whole story of Chanticleer and Dame Partlet in "The Nonnes Preestes
Tale" is genuine humanity. I know nothing better in its kind. The poets
seem to be only more frank and plain-spoken than other men. Their verse
is but confessions. They always confide in the reader, and speak privily
with him, keeping nothing back.[316]

I know of no safe rule by which to judge of the purity of a former age
but that I see that the impure of the present age are not apt to rise
to noble sentiments when they speak or write, and suspect, therefore,
that there may be more truth than is allowed in the apology that such
was the manner of the age.[317]

     Within the circuit of this plodding life,
     There are moments of an azure hue
     And as unspotted fair as is the violet
     Or anemone, when the spring strews them
     By some south woodside; which make untrue
     The best philosophy which has so poor an aim
     But to console man for his grievance here.
     I have remembered when the winter came,
     High in my chamber in the frosty nights,
     How in the summer past some
     Unrecorded beam slanted across
     Some upland pasture where the Johnswort grew,
     Or heard, amidst the verdure of my mind, the bee's
          long-smothered hum,
     So by the cheap economy of God made rich to go upon
          my wintry work again.
     In the still, cheerful cold of winter nights,
     When, in the cold light of the moon,
     On every twig and rail and jutting spout
     The icy spears are doubling their length
     Against the glancing arrows of the sun,
     And the shrunk wheels creak along the way,
     Some summer accident long past
     Of lakelet gleaming in the July beams,
     Or hum of bee under the blue flag,
     Loitering in the meads, or busy rill
     which now stands dumb and still,
     its own memorial, purling at its play along the slopes,
     and through the meadows next, till that its sound was
     quenched in the staid current of its parent stream.

In memory is the more reality. I have seen how the furrows shone but
late upturned, and where the fieldfare followed in the rear, when all
the fields stood bound and hoar beneath a thick integument of snow.[318]

       *       *       *       *       *

When the snow is falling thick and fast, the flakes nearest you seem
to be driving straight to the ground, while the more distant seem to
float in the air in a quivering bank, like feathers, or like birds at
play, and not as if sent on any errand. So, at a little distance, all
the works of Nature proceed with sport and frolic. They are more in the
eye and less in the deed.


_Dec. 31. Friday._ Books of natural history make the most cheerful
winter reading. I read in Audubon with a thrill of delight, when
the snow covers the ground, of the magnolia, and the Florida keys,
and their warm sea breezes; of the fence-rail, and the cotton-tree,
and the migrations of the rice-bird; or of the breaking up of winter
in Labrador. I seem to hear the melting of the snow on the forks of
the Missouri as I read. I imbibe some portion of health from these
reminiscences of luxuriant nature.

There is a singular health for me in those words Labrador and East
Main which no desponding creed recognizes. How much more than federal
are these States! If there were no other vicissitudes but the seasons,
with their attendant and consequent changes, our interest would never
flag. Much more is a-doing than Congress wots of in the winter season.
What journal do the persimmon and buckeye keep, or the sharp-shinned
hawk? What is transpiring from summer to winter in the Carolinas,
and the Great Pine Forest, and the Valley of the Mohawk? The merely
political aspect of the land is never very cheering. Men are degraded
when considered as the members of a political organization. As a nation
the people never utter one great and healthy word. From this side all
nations present only the symptoms of disease. I see but Bunker's Hill
and Sing Sing, the District of Columbia and Sullivan's Island, with a
few avenues connecting them. But paltry are all these beside one blast
of the east or south wind which blows over them all.

In society you will not find health, but in nature. You must converse
much with the field and woods, if you would imbibe such health into your
mind and spirit as you covet for your body. Society is always diseased,
and the best is the sickest. There is no scent in it so wholesome as
that of the pines, nor any fragrance so penetrating and restorative as
that of everlasting in high pastures. Without that our feet at least
stood in the midst of nature, all our faces would be pale and livid.

I should like to keep some book of natural history always by me as
a sort of elixir, the reading of which would restore the tone of my
system and secure me true and cheerful views of life. For to the sick,
nature is sick, but to the well, a fountain of health. To the soul that
contemplates some trait of natural beauty no harm nor disappointment
can come. The doctrines of despair, of spiritual or political servitude,
no priestcraft nor tyranny, was ever [_sic_] taught by such as drank in
the harmony of nature.[319]