THE MIDDLE YEARS (1882-1888).


_To Miss Henrietta Reubell._


Metropolitan Club,
Washington, D. C.

Jan. 9th, 1882.

My dear Miss Reubell,

I have never yet thanked you for the amiable note in which you kindly
invited me to write to you from the Americas; and the best way I can do
so now is to simply respond to your invitation. I am in the Americas
indeed, and behold I write. These countries are extremely pleasant, and
I recommend you to come and see them au plus tôt. You would have a great
career here, and would return--if you should return at all--with a
multitude of scalps at your slim girdle. There is a great demand for
brilliant women, and I can promise you that you would be intimately
appreciated. I shall return about the first of May--but without any
blond scalps, though with a great many happy impressions. Though I
should perhaps not linger upon the point myself, I believe I have had a
certain success. As for ces gens-ci, they have had great success with
me, and have been delightfully genial and hospitable. It is here that
people treat you well; venez-y voir. You have had a great many things, I
know; but you have not had a winter in the Americas. The people are
extremely nice and humane. I didn't care for it much at first--but it
improves immensely on acquaintance, and after you have got the right
point of view and _diapason_ it is a wonderfully entertaining and
amusing country. The skies are as blue as the blotting paper (as yet
unspotted) on which this scrawl reposes, and the sunshine, which is
deliciously warm, has always an air de fête. I have seen multitudes of
people, and no one has been disagreeable. That is different from your
pretentious Old World. Of Washington I can speak as yet but little,
having come but four days ago; but it is like nothing else in the old
world or the new. Enormous spaces, hundreds of miles of asphalte, a
charming climate and the most entertaining society in America. I spent a
month in Boston and another in New York, and have paid three or four
visits in the country. All this was very jolly, and it is pleasant to be
in one's native land, where one is someone and something. If I were to
abide by my vanity only I should never return to that Europe which
ignores me. Unfortunately I love my Europe better than my vanity, and I
appreciate you, if I may say so, better than either! Therefore I shall
return--about the month of May. I am thinking _tremendously_ about
writing to Mrs. Boit--kindly tell her so. My very friendly regards to
your dear Mother, and your Brother. A word to _Cambridge, Mass._ (my
father's) will always reach me. It would be very _charming_ of you to
address one to yours very faithfully,

H. JAMES.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._


20 Quincy Street,
Cambridge, Mass.

Feb. 7th, 1882.

My dear Charles,

Only a word to thank you very heartily for your little note of
friendship, and to send you a grateful message, as well, from my father
and sister. My mother's death is the greatest change that could befall
us, but our lives are so full of her still that we scarcely yet seem to
have lost her. The long beneficence of her own life remains and
survives.

I shall see you after your return to Shady Hill, as I am to be for a
good while in these regions. I wish to remain near my father, who is
infirm and rather tottering; and I shall settle myself in Boston for the
next four or five months. In other words I shall be constantly in
Cambridge and will often look in at you. I hope you have enjoyed your
pilgrimage.

Ever faithfully yours,
H. JAMES jr.




_To Mrs. John L. Gardner._

     The play referred to in this letter is doubtless the dramatic
     version of _Daisy Miller_; it remained unacted, but was published
     in America in 1883.


3 Bolton St., Piccadilly.
June 5th [1882].

My dear Mrs. Gardner,

A little greeting across the sea! I meant to send it as soon as I
touched the shore; but the huge grey mass of London has interposed. I
experience the need of proving to you that I missed seeing you before I
left America--though I tried one day--the one before I quitted Boston;
but you were still in New York, contributing the harmony of your
presence and the melodies of your toilet, to the din of Wagnerian
fiddles and the crash of Teutonic cymbals. You must have passed me in
the train that last Saturday; but you have never done anything but pass
me--and _dépasser_ me; so it doesn't so much matter. That final
interview--that supreme farewell--will however always be one of the most
fascinating incidents of life--the incidents that _didn't_ occur, and
leave me to muse on what they might have done for us. I think with
extraordinary tenderness of those two pretty little evenings when I read
you my play. They make a charming picture--a perfect picture--in my
mind, and the memory of them appeals to all that is most _raffiné_ in my
constitution. Drop a tear--a diminutive tear (as _your_ tears must
be--small but beautifully-shaped pearls) upon the fact that my drama is
not after all to be brought out in New York (at least for the
present).... It is possible it may see the light here. I am to read it
to the people of the St. James's Theatre next week. _Please don't speak
of this._ London seems big and black and horrible and delightful--Boston
seems only the last named. You indeed could make it horrible for me if
you chose, and you could also make it big; but I doubt if you could make
it black. It would be a fair and glittering horror, suggestive of
icicles and white fur. I wonder if you are capable of writing me three
words? Let one of them tell me you are well. The second--what you
please! The third that you sometimes bestow a friendly thought upon
yours very faithfully,

H. JAMES jr.




_To Miss Grace Norton._


Hôtel du Midi,
Toulouse.

Oct. 17th [1882].

My dear Grace,

You _shall_ have a letter this morning, whatever happens! I am waiting
for the train to Carcassonne, and you will perhaps ask yourself why you
are thus sandwiched between these two mouldy antiquities. It is
precisely because they are mouldy that I invoke your genial presence.
Toulouse is dreary and not interesting, and I am afraid that Carcassonne
will answer to the same description I heard given a couple of weeks ago
by an English lady in Touraine, of the charming Château d'Amboise:
"rather curious, you know, but very, very dirty." Therefore my spirit
turns for comfort to what I have known best in life. I got your last
excellent letter an abominable number of weeks ago; and I hereby
propose, as a rule of our future correspondence, that I be graciously
absolved from ever specifying the time that has elapsed since the
arrival of the letter I am supposed to be answering. This custom will
ease me off immensely. Your last, however, is not so remote but that the
scolding you gave me for sending your previous letter to Mrs. Kemble is
fearfully fresh in my mind. My dear Grace, I regret extremely having
irritated you; but I would fain wrestle with you on this subject. I
think you have a false code about the showing of letters--and in calling
it a breach of confidence you surely confound the limits of things. Of
course there is always a particular discretion for the particular case;
but what are letters but talk, and what is the showing them but the
repetition of talk? The same rules that govern that of course govern the
other; but I don't see why they should be more stringent. It is indeed,
I think, of the very essence of a good letter to be shown--it is wasted
if it is kept for _one_. Was not Mme. de Sévigné's last always handed
about to a hundred people--was not Horace Walpole's? What was right for
them is, it seems to me, right for you. However, I make this little
protest simply for the theory's sake, and promise you solemnly that in
practice, in future, you shall be my own exclusive and peculiar Sévigné!
Yet I don't at all insist on being your exclusive Walpole! I have
indeed the sweet security of the conviction that you will never "want,"
as they say (_you_ don't) in Cambridge, to exhibit my epistles. Only I
give you full leave to read them aloud at your soirées! Have your
soirées recommenced by the way? Where are you, my dear Grace, and how
are you? The question about your whereabouts will perhaps make you
smile, if anything in this letter can, as I make no doubt you are
enjoying the gorgeous charm (I speak without irony) of a Cambridge
October. For myself, as you see, I am "doing" the south of France--for
literary purposes, into which I won't pretend to enter, as they are not
of a very elevated character. (I am trying to write some articles about
these regions for an American "illustrated"--_Harper_--but I don't
foresee, as yet, any very brilliant results.) I left England some five
weeks ago, and after a few days in Paris came down into Touraine--for
the sake of the châteaux of the Loire. At the hotel at Tours, where I
spent 12 days, I had the advantage of the society of Mrs. Kemble, and
her daughter Mrs. Wister, with the son of the latter. We made some
excursions together--that is, _minus_ Mrs. K. (a large void,) who was
too infirm to junket about, and then the ladies returned to Paris and I
took my way further afield. Touraine is charming, Chenonceaux, Chambord,
Blois, etc., very interesting, and that episode was on the whole a
success--enlivened too by my exciting company. But the rest of France
(that is those parts I have been through) [is] rather disappointing,
though I suppose when I recite my itinerary you will feel that I ought
to have found a world of picturesqueness--I mean at Bourges, Le Mans,
Angers, Nantes, La Rochelle, Poitiers, etc. The cathedral of Bourges is
worth a long pilgrimage to see; but for the rest France has preserved
the physiognomy of the past much less than England and than Italy.
Besides, when I come into the south, I don't console myself for not
being in the latter country. I don't care for these people, and in fine
I rather hate it. I return to Paris on November 1st, and spend a month
there. Then I return to England for the winter. When I am in that
country I want to get out of it, and when I am out of it I languish for
its heavy air. England is just now in a rather "cocky" mood, and
disposed to carry it high with her little Egyptian victories. It is such
a satisfaction to me to see her again counting for something in Europe
that I would give her _carte blanche_ to go as far as she chooses--or
dares; but at the same time I hope she won't exhibit a vulgar greed. It
has a really dramatic interest for me to see how the great Gladstone
will acquit himself of a situation in which all his high principles will
be subjected to an extraordinary strain. He will be, I suspect, neither
very lofty, nor very base, but will compromise. I don't suppose,
however, you care much about these far-away matters. I hope, my dear
Grace, that your life is taking more and more a possible shape--that
your summer has left you some pleasant memories, and your winter brings
some cheerful hopes. I don't _think_ I shall be so long again--at any
rate my letters are no proof of my sentiments--by which I mean that my
silence is no _dis_proof; for after all I wish to be believed when I
tell you that I am most affectionately yours,

HENRY JAMES jr.




_To William James._


131 Mt. Vernon St.,
Boston.

Dec. 26th, '82.

My dear William--

You will already have heard the circumstances under which I arrived at
New York on Thursday 21st, at noon, after a very rapid and prosperous,
but painful passage. Letters from Alice and Katherine L. were awaiting
me at the dock, telling me that dear father was to be buried that
morning. I reached Boston at 11 that night; there was so much delay in
getting up-town. I found Bob at the station here. He had come on for the
funeral only, and returned to Milwaukee the next morning. Alice, who was
in bed, was very quiet and A. K. was perfect. They told me
everything--or at least they told me a great deal--before we parted that
night, and what they told me was deeply touching, and yet not at all
literally painful. Father had been so tranquil, so painless, had died so
easily and, as it were, deliberately, and there had been none--not the
least--of that anguish and confusion which we imagined in London.... He
simply, after the "improvement" of which, we were written before I
sailed, had a sudden relapse--a series of swoons--after which he took to
his bed not to rise again. He had no visible malady--strange as it may
seem. The "softening of the brain" was simply a gradual refusal of food,
because he _wished_ to die. There was no dementia except a sort of
exaltation of his belief that he had entered into "the spiritual life."
Nothing could persuade him to eat, and yet he never suffered, or gave
the least sign of suffering, from inanition. All this will seem strange
and incredible to you, but told with all the details, as Aunt Kate has
told it to me, it becomes real--taking father as he was--almost
natural. He prayed and longed to die. He ebbed and faded away, though in
spite of his strength becoming continually less, he was able to see
people and talk. He wished to see as many people as he could, and he
talked with them without effort. He saw F. Boott and talked much two or
three days before he died. Alice says he said the most picturesque and
humorous things. He knew I was coming and was glad, but not impatient.
He was delighted when he was told that you would stay in my rooms in my
absence, and seemed much interested in the idea. He had no belief
apparently that he should live to see me, but was perfectly cheerful
about it. He slept a great deal, and as A. K. says there was "so little
of the sick-room" about him. He lay facing the windows, which he would
never have darkened--never pained by the light.... 27th a.m. Will send
this now and write again tonight. All our wish here is that you should
remain abroad the next six months.

Ever your
H. JAMES.




_To George du Maurier._

     The article on George du Maurier was that reprinted in _Partial
     Portraits_ (1888).


115 East 25th Street,
New York.

April 17th, 1883.

My dear Du Maurier,

I send you by this post the sheets of that little tribute to your genius
which I spoke of to you so many months ago and which appears in the
_Century_ for May. The magazine is not yet out, or I would send you
that, and the long delay makes my article so slight in itself, rather
an impotent conclusion. Let me hasten to assure you that the "London
Society", tacked to the title, is none of my doing, but that of the
editors of the Magazine, who put in an urgent plea for it. Such as my
poor remarks are, I hope you will find in them nothing disagreeable, but
only the expression of an exceeding friendliness. May my blessing go
with them and a multitude of good wishes!

I should have been to see you again long ago if I had not suddenly been
called to America (by the death of my father) in December last. The
autumn, before that, I spent altogether abroad, and have scarcely been
in England since I bade you good-bye, after that very delightful walk
and talk we had together last July--an episode of which I have the
happiest, tenderest memory. Romantic Hampstead seems very far away from
East 25th St; though East 25th St. has some good points. I have been
spending the winter in Boston and am here only on a visit to a friend,
and though I am "New Yorkais d'origine" I never return to this wonderful
city without being entertained and impressed afresh. New York is full of
types and figures and curious social idiosyncrasies, and I only wish we
had some one here, to hold up the mirror, with a 15th part of your
talent. It is altogether an extraordinary growing, swarming, glittering,
pushing, chattering, good-natured, cosmopolitan place, and perhaps in
some ways the best imitation of Paris that can be found (yet with a
great originality of its own.) But I didn't mean to be so geographical;
I only meant to shake hands, and to remind myself again that if my dear
old London life is interrupted, it isn't, heaven be praised, finished,
and that therefore there is a use--a delightful and superior use--in
"keeping up" my relations. I am talking a good deal like Mrs. Ponsonby
de Tomkyns, but when you reflect that you are not Sir Gorgius Midas,
you will acquit me. I have a fair prospect of returning to England late
in the summer, and that will be for a long day. I hope your winter has
used you kindly and that Mrs. du Maurier is well, and also the other
ornaments of your home, including the Great St. Bernard. I greet them
all most kindly and am ever very faithfully yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Miss Grace Norton._


131 Mount Vernon St., Boston.
July 28th [1883].

My dear Grace,

Before the sufferings of others I am always utterly powerless, and your
letter reveals such depths of suffering that I hardly know what to say
to you. This indeed is not my last word--but it must be my first. You
are not isolated, verily, in such states of feeling as this--that is, in
the sense that you appear to make all the misery of all mankind your
own; only I have a terrible sense that you give all and receive
nothing--that there is no reciprocity in your sympathy--that you have
all the affliction of it and none of the returns. However--I am
determined not to speak to you except with the voice of stoicism. I
don't know _why_ we live--the gift of life comes to us from I don't know
what source or for what purpose; but I believe we can go on living for
the reason that (always of course up to a certain point) life is the
most valuable thing we know anything about, and it is therefore
presumptively a great mistake to surrender it while there is any yet
left in the cup. In other words consciousness is an illimitable power,
and though at times it may seem to be all consciousness of misery, yet
in the way it propagates itself from wave to wave, so that we never
cease to feel, and though at moments we appear to, try to, pray to,
there is something that holds one in one's place, makes it a standpoint
in the universe which it is probably good not to forsake. You are right
in your consciousness that we are all echoes and reverberations of the
_same_, and you are noble when your interest and pity as to everything
that surrounds you, appears to have a sustaining and harmonizing power.
Only don't, I beseech you, _generalize_ too much in these sympathies and
tendernesses--remember that every life is a special problem which is not
yours but another's, and content yourself with the terrible algebra of
your own. Don't melt too much into the universe, but be as solid and
dense and fixed as you can. We all live together, and those of us who
love and know, live so most. We help each other--even unconsciously,
each in our own effort, we lighten the effort of others, we contribute
to the sum of success, make it possible for others to live. Sorrow comes
in great waves--no one can know that better than you--but it rolls over
us, and though it may almost smother us it leaves us on the spot, and we
know that if it is strong we are stronger, inasmuch as it passes and we
remain. It wears us, uses us, but we wear it and use it in return; and
it is blind, whereas we after a manner see. My dear Grace, you are
passing through a darkness in which I myself in my ignorance see nothing
but that you have been made wretchedly ill by it; but it is only a
darkness, it is not an end, or _the_ end. Don't think, don't feel, any
more than you can help, don't conclude or decide--don't do anything but
_wait_. Everything will pass, and serenity and _accepted_ mysteries and
disillusionments, and the tenderness of a few good people, and new
opportunities and ever so much of life, in a word, will remain. You will
do all sorts of things yet, and I will help you. The only thing is not
to _melt_ in the meanwhile. I insist upon the necessity of a sort of
mechanical condensation--so that however fast the horse may run away
there will, when he pulls up, be a somewhat agitated but perfectly
identical G. N. left in the saddle. Try not to be ill--that is all; for
in that there is a failure. You are marked out for success, and you must
not fail. You have my tenderest affection and all my confidence. Ever
your faithful friend--

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


Hôtel de Hollande, Paris.
Feb. 20th, '84.

My dear William--

I owe you an answer to two letters--especially to the one in which you
announce to me the birth of your little Israelite. I bid him the most
affectionate welcome into this world of care and I hope that by this
time he has begun to get used to it. I am too delighted to hear of
Alice's well-being, and trust it has now merged into complete recovery.
Apropos of the Babe, allow me to express an earnest hope that you will
give him some handsome and pictorial name (within discreet limits). Most
of our names are rather colourless--collez-lui dessus, therefore, a
little patch of brightness--and don't call him _after_ any one--give him
a name quite to himself. And let it be only one.... I have seen several
times the gifted Sargent, whose work I admire exceedingly and who is a
remarkably artistic nature and charming fellow. I have also spent an
evening with A. Daudet and a morning at Auteuil with Ed. de Goncourt.
Seeing these people does me a world of good, and this intellectual
vivacity and _raffinement_ make an English mind seem like a sort of
glue-pot. But their ignorance, corruption and complacency are strange,
full strange. I wish I had time to give you more of my impressions of
them. They are at any rate very interesting and Daudet, who has a
remarkable personal charm and is as beautiful as the day, was extremely
nice to me. I saw also Zola at his house, and the whole group are of
course intense pessimists. Daudet justified this to me (as regards
himself) by the general sadness of life and his fear, for instance,
whenever he comes in, that his wife and children may have died while he
was out! I hope _you_ manage to keep free from this apprehension.... I
return to London on the 27th, to stick fast there till the summer. I
embrace Alice and the little Jew and am ever your affectionate

HENRY.




_To W. D. Howells._


Paris.
Feb. 21st, 1884.

My dear Howells,

Your letter of the 2d last gives me great pleasure. A frozen Atlantic
seemed to stretch between us, and I had had no news of you to speak of
save an allusion, in a late letter of T. B. A., to your having
infant-disease in your house. You give me a good account of this, and I
hope your tax is paid this year at least. These are not things to make a
hardened bachelor mend his ways.--Hardened as I am, however, I am not
proof against being delighted to hear that my Barberina tale entertained
you. I am not prepared even to resent the malignity of your remark that
the last third is not the best. It isn't; the [last] part is squeezed
together and écourté! It is always the fault of my things that the head
and trunk are too big and the legs too short. I spread myself, always,
at first, from a nervous fear that I shall not have enough of my
peculiar tap to "go round." But I always (or generally) have, and
therefore, at the end, have to fill one of the cups to overflowing. My
tendency to this disproportion remains incorrigible. I begin short tales
as if they were to be long novels. Apropos of which, ask Osgood to show
you also the sheets of another thing I lately sent him--"A New England
Winter." It is not very good--on the contrary; but it will perhaps seem
to you to put into form a certain impression of Boston.--What you tell
me of the success of ----'s last novel sickens and almost paralyses me.
It seems to me (the book) so contemptibly bad and ignoble that the idea
of people reading it in such numbers makes one return upon one's self
and ask what is the use of trying to write anything decent or serious
for a public so absolutely idiotic. It must be totally wasted. I would
rather have produced the basest experiment in the "naturalism" that is
being practised here than such a piece of sixpenny humbug. Work so
shamelessly bad seems to me to dishonour the novelist's art to a degree
that is absolutely not to be forgiven; just as its success dishonours
the people for whom one supposes one's self to write. Excuse my
ferocities, which (more discreetly and philosophically) I think you must
share; and don't mention it, please, to any one, as it will be set down
to green-eyed jealousy.

I came to this place three weeks since--on the principle that anything
is quieter than London; but I return to the British scramble in a few
days. Paris speaks to me, always, for about such a time as this, with
many voices; but at the end of a month I have learned all it has to say.
I have been seeing something of Daudet, Goncourt and Zola; and there is
nothing more interesting to me now than the effort and experiment of
this little group, with its truly infernal intelligence of art, form,
manner--its intense artistic life. They do the only kind of work,
to-day, that I respect; and in spite of their ferocious pessimism and
their handling of unclean things, they are at least serious and honest.
The floods of tepid soap and water which under the name of novels are
being vomited forth in England, seem to me, by contrast, to do little
honour to our race. I say this to you, because I regard you as the great
American naturalist. I don't think you go far enough, and you are
haunted with romantic phantoms and a tendency to factitious glosses; but
you are in the right path, and I wish you repeated triumphs
there--beginning with your Americo-Venetian--though I slightly fear,
from what you tell me, that he will have a certain "gloss." It isn't for
me to reproach you with that, however, the said gloss being a constant
defect of _my_ characters; they have too much of it--too damnably much.
But I am a failure!--comparatively. Read Zola's last thing: _La Joie de
Vivre_. This title of course has a desperate irony: but the work is
admirably solid and serious.... Addio--stia bene. I wish you could send
me anything _you_ have in the way of advance-sheets. It is rather hard
that as you are the only English novelist I read (except Miss Woolson),
I should not have more comfort with you. Give my love to Winnie: I am
sure she will dance herself well. Why doesn't Mrs. Howells try it too?

Tout à vous,
HENRY JAMES.




_To John Addington Symonds._


(3 Bolton St., Piccadilly, W.)
Paris.

Feb. 22nd, 1884.

My dear J. A. Symonds,

Your good letter came to me just as I was leaving London (for a month in
this place--to return there in a few days,) and the distractions and
interruptions incidental to a short stay in Paris must account for my
not having immediately answered it, as the spirit moved me to do. I
thank you for it very kindly, and am much touched by your telling me
that a communication from me should in any degree, and for a moment,
have lighted up the horizon of the Alpine crevice, in which I can well
believe you find it hard, and even cruel, to be condemned to pass life.
To condole with you on a fate so stern must seem at the best but a
hollow business; I will therefore only wish you a continuance of the
courage of which your abundant and delightful work gives such evidence,
and take pleasure in thinking that there may be entertainment for you in
any of my small effusions.--I _did_ send you the _Century_ more than a
year ago, with my paper on Venice, not having then the prevision of my
reprinting it with some other things. I sent it you because it was a
constructive way of expressing the good will I felt for you in
consequence of what you have written about the land of Italy--and of
intimating to you, somewhat dumbly, that I am an attentive and
sympathetic reader. I nourish for the said Italy an unspeakably tender
passion, and your pages always seemed to say to me that you were one of
a small number of people who love it as much as I do--in addition to
your knowing it immeasurably better. I wanted to recognize this (to
your knowledge;) for it seemed to me that the victims of a common
passion should sometimes exchange a look, and I sent you off the
magazine at a venture.... I thank you very sincerely for the
good-natured things you say of its companions. It is all very light
work, indeed, and the only merit I should dream of anyone finding in it
would be that it is "prettily turned." I thank you still further for
your offer to send me the Tauchnitz volumes of your Italian local
sketches. I know them already well, as I have said, and possess them in
the English issue; but I shall welcome them warmly, directly from
you--especially as I gather that they have occasional retouchings.

I lately spent a number of months in America, after a long absence, but
I live in London and have put my constant address at the top of my
letter. I imagine that it is scarcely ever in your power to come to
England, but do take note of my whereabouts, for this happy (and
possibly, to you, ideal) contingency. I should very much like to see
you--but I go little, nowadays, to Switzerland in summer (though at one
time I was there a good deal). I think it possible moreover that at that
season you get out of your Alps. I certainly should, in your place, for
the Alps are easily too many for me.--I can well imagine the innumerable
things you miss at Davos--year after year--and (I will say it) I think
of you with exceeding sympathy. As a sign of that I shall send you
everything I publish.

I shake hands with [you], and am very truly yours,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Alphonse Daudet._


3 Bolton St., Piccadilly, W.
London, 19 Juin [1884].

Mon cher Alphonse Daudet,

J'aurais dû déjà vous remercier de tout le plaisir que vous m'avez fait
en m'envoyant _Sapho_. Je vous suis très-reconnaissant de cette bonne et
amicale pensée, qui s'ajoutera désormais, pour moi, au souvenir du
livre. Je n'avais pas attendu l'arrivée de votre volume pour le
lire--mais cela m'a donné l'occasion de m'y remettre encore et de tirer
un peu au clair les diverses impressions que tant d'admirables pages
m'ont laissées. Je n'essaierai pas de vous rapporter ces impressions
dans leur plénitude--dans la crainte de ne réussir qu'à déformer ma
pensée--tout autant que la vôtre. Un nouveau livre de vous me fait
passer par l'esprit une foule de belles idées, que je vous confierais de
vive voix--et de grand cœur--si j'avais le bonheur de vous voir plus
souvent. Pour le moment, je vous dirai seulement que tout ce qui vient
de vous compte, pour moi, comme un grand évènement, une jouissance rare
et fructueuse. Je vous aime mieux dans certaines pages que dans
d'autres, mais vous me charmez, vous m'enlevez toujours, et votre
manière me pénètre plus qu'aucune autre. Je trouve dans _Sapho_
énormément de vérité et de vie. Ce n'est pas du roman, c'est de
l'histoire, et de la plus complète et de la mieux éclairée. Lorsqu'on a
fait un livre aussi solide et aussi sérieux que celui-là, on n'a besoin
d'être rassuré par personne; ce n'est donc que pour m'encourager
moi-même que je constate dans Sapho encore une preuve--à ajouter à
celles que vous avez données--de tout ce que le roman peut accomplir
comme révélation de la vie et du drôle de mélange que nous sommes. La
fille est étudiée avec une patience merveilleuse--c'est un de ces
portraits qui épuisent un type. Je vous avouerai que je trouve le jeune
homme un peu sacrifié--comme étude et comme recherche--sa figure me
paraissant moins éclairée--en comparaison de celle de la femme--qu'il ne
le faudrait pour l'ntérêt moral la valeur tragique. J'aurais voulu que
vous nous eussiez fait voir davantage par où il a passé--en matière
d'expérience plus personnelle et plus intime encore que les coucheries
avec Fanny--en matière de rammollissement de volonté et de relâchement
d'âme. En un mot, le drame ne se passe peut-être pas assez dans l'âme et
dans la conscience de Jean. C'est à mesure que nous touchons à son
caractère même que la situation devient intéressante--et ce caractère,
vous me faites l'effet de l'avoir un peu négligé. Vous me direz que
voilà un jugement bien anglais, et que nous inventons des abstractions,
comme nous disons, afin de nous dispenser de toucher aux grosses
réalités. J'estime pourtant qu'il n'y a rien de plus réel, de plus
positif, de plus à peindre, qu'un caractère; c'est là qu'on trouve bien
la couleur et la forme. Vous l'avez bien prouvé, du reste, dans chacun
de vos livres, et en vous disant que vous avez laissé l'amant de Sapho
un peu trop en blanc, ce n'est qu'avec vous-même que je vous compare.
Mais je ne voulais que vous remercier et répondre à votre envoi. Je vous
souhaite tout le repos qu'il vous faudra pour recommencer encore! Je
garde de cette soirée que j'ai passée chez vous au mois de février une
impression toute colorée. Je vous prie de me rappeler au souvenir
bienveillant de Madame Daudet, je vous serre la main et suis votre bien
dévoué confrère,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     H. J.'s article on "The Art of Fiction" was reprinted in _Partial
     Portraits_. Stevenson's "rejoinder" was the essay called "A Humble
     Remonstrance," included in _Memories and Portraits_.


3 Bolton St., W.
Dec. 5th [1884].

My dear Robert Louis Stevenson,

I read only last night your paper in the December _Longman's_ in genial
rejoinder to my article in the same periodical on Besant's lecture, and
the result of that charming half-hour is a friendly desire to send you
three words. Not words of discussion, dissent, retort or remonstrance,
but of hearty sympathy, charged with the assurance of my enjoyment of
everything you write. It's a luxury, in this immoral age, to encounter
some one who _does_ write--who is really acquainted with that lovely
art. It wouldn't be fair to contend with you here; besides, we agree, I
think, much more than we disagree, and though there are points as to
which a more irrepressible spirit than mine would like to try a fall,
that is not what I want to say--but on the contrary, to thank you for so
much that is suggestive and felicitous in your remarks--justly felt and
brilliantly said. They are full of these things, and the current of your
admirable style floats pearls and diamonds. Excellent are your closing
words, and no one can assent more than I to your proposition that all
art is a simplification. It is a pleasure to see that truth so neatly
uttered. My pages, in Longman, were simply a plea for liberty: they were
only half of what I had to say, and some day I shall try and express the
remainder. Then I shall tickle you a little affectionately as I pass.
You will say that my "liberty" is an obese divinity, requiring extra
measures; but after one more go I shall hold my tongue. The native
_gaiety_ of all that you write is delightful to me, and when I reflect
that it proceeds from a man whom life has laid much of the time on his
back (as I understand it), I find you a genius indeed. There must be
pleasure in it for you too. I ask Colvin about you whenever I see him,
and I shall have to send him this to forward to you. I am with
innumerable good wishes yours very faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._

     _The Literary Remains of the late Henry James_, with an
     introduction by William James, had just been published in America.


3 Bolton Street, W.
Jan. 2d, 1885.

Dear William--

I must give some response, however brief, to your letter of Dec. 21st,
enclosing the project of your house and a long letter from R. Temple.
Three days ago, too, came the two copies of Father's (and your) book,
which have [given] me great filial and fraternal joy. All I have had
time to read as yet is the introduction--your part of which seems to me
admirable, perfect. It must have been very difficult to do, and you
couldn't have done it better. And how beautiful and extraordinarily
individual (some of them magnificent) all the extracts from Father's
writings which you have selected so happily. It comes over me as I read
them (more than ever before,) how intensely original and personal his
whole system was, and how indispensable it is that those who go in for
religion should take some heed of it. I can't enter into it (much)
myself--I can't be so theological nor grant his extraordinary premises,
nor throw myself into conceptions of heavens and hells, nor be sure that
the keynote of nature is humanity, etc. But I can enjoy greatly the
spirit, the feeling, and the manner of the whole thing (full as this
last is of things that displease me too,) and feel really that poor
Father, struggling so alone all his life, and so destitute of every
worldly or literary ambition, was yet a great writer. At any rate your
task is beautifully and honourably done--may it be as great or even half
as great a service as it deserves to be, to his memory! The book came at
a bad time for Alice, as she has had an upset which I will tell you of;
but though she has been able to have it in her hand but for a moment it
evidently gives her great pleasure. She burst into tears when I gave it
to her, exclaiming "How beautiful it is that William should have done
it! Isn't it, isn't it beautiful? And how good William is, how good, how
good!" And we talked of poor Father's fading away into silence and
darkness, the waves of the world closing over this system which he tried
to offer it, and of how we were touched by this act of yours which will
(I am sure) do so much to rescue him from oblivion. I have received no
notice from Scribner of the arrival of the other volumes, and shall
write to him in a day or two if I don't hear. But I am rather
embarrassed as to what to do with so many--wishing only to dispose of
them in a manner which will entail some prospect of decent consideration
and courtesy. I can give away five or six copies to persons who will
probably have some attention and care for them (e.g. Fredk. Harrison,
Stopford Brooke, Burne-Jones, Mrs. Orr, etc.) But the newspapers and
reviews are so grim and philistine and impenetrable and stupid, that I
can scarcely think of any to which it isn't almost an act of
untenderness to send it. But I will go into the matter with Scribner....
The project for your house is charming--very big it looks, and of a
most pleasant type. Love to all.

Ever your
HENRY.




_To Miss Grace Norton._


3 Bolton St., W.
Jan. 24th [1885].

My dear Grace,

       *       *       *       *       *

It is a feature of life in this place that the longer it lasts the more
one's liabilities of every kind accumulate--the more things there are to
be done, every hour of the day. I have so many to do that I am thinking
of inventing some new day with 40 or 50 hours--or else some newer one
still, with only half a dozen, as that would simplify a large proportion
of one's diurnal duties out of existence.... I am having a "quieter"
winter than I have had for some years (in London) and have seen very few
new people and not even many old friends. My quietness (comparative of
course) is my solemn choice, and means that I have been dining out much
less than at most former times, for the sacred purpose of getting my
evenings to myself. I have been sitting at the festive British board for
so many years now that I feel as if I had earned the right to give it up
save in really seductive cases. You can guess the proportion of these!
It is the only way to find any time to read--and my reading was going to
the dogs. Therefore I propose to become henceforth an occasional and not
a regular diner, with the well-founded hope that my mind, body, spirits,
temper and general view of the human understanding and of the
conversational powers of the English race, will be the gainers by it.
Moreover, there is very little "going on"--the country is gloomy,
anxious, and London reflects its gloom. Westminster Hall and the Tower
were half blown up two days ago by Irish Dynamiters, there is a
catastrophe to the little British force in the Soudan in the air (rather
an ominous want of news since Gen. Stewart's victory at Aboukir a week
ago,) and a general sense of rocks ahead in the foreign relations of the
country--combined with an exceeding want of confidence--indeed a deep
disgust--with the present ministry in regard to such relations. I find
such a situation as this extremely interesting and it makes me feel how
much I am attached to this country and, on the whole, to its sometimes
exasperating people. The possible _malheurs_--reverses, dangers,
embarrassments, the "decline," in a word, of old England, go to my
heart, and I can imagine no spectacle more touching, more thrilling and
even dramatic, than to see this great precarious, artificial empire, on
behalf of which, nevertheless, so much of the strongest and finest stuff
of the greatest race (for such they are) has been expended, struggling
with forces which perhaps, in the long run, will prove too many for it.
If she only will struggle, and not collapse and surrender and give up a
part which, looking at Europe as it is to-day, still may be great, the
drama will be well worth watching from [such] a good, near standpoint as
I have here. But I didn't mean to be so beastly political! Another drama
interesting me is the question of poor dear J. R. Lowell's possible
recall after Cleveland mounts the throne. This, to me, is tragic,
pathetic. His position here is in the highest degree honourable, useful,
agreeable--in short perfect; and to give it all up to return, from one
day to another, to John Holmes and the Brattle Street horsecar (which is
very much what it amounts to--save when he goes to see you) seems to me
to be the sport of a cruel, a barbaric, fortune.... I haven't asked you
about yourself--the complexion of your winter, etc. But there are some
things I know sufficiently without asking. So do you--as that I am
always praying for you (though I don't pray, in general, and don't
understand it, I make this brilliant exception for _you_!)

Your very faithful friend,
HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._

     The first number of _The Bostonians_ appeared this month in the
     _Century Magazine_, containing scenes in which the veteran
     philanthropist "Miss Birdseye" figured.


3 Bolton St., W.
Feb. 14th [1885].

Dear William,

I am quite appalled by your note of the 2nd, in which you assault me on
the subject of my having painted a "portrait from life" of Miss Peabody!
I was in some measure prepared for it by Lowell's (as I found the other
day) taking for granted that she had been my model, and an allusion to
the same effect in a note from Aunt Kate. Still, I didn't expect the
charge to come from you. I hold, that I have done nothing to deserve
it.... I should be very sorry--in fact deadly sick, or fatally ill--if I
thought Miss Peabody _herself_ supposed I intended to represent her. I
absolutely had no shadow of such an intention. I have not seen Miss P.
for twenty years, I never had but the most casual observation of her, I
didn't know whether she was alive or dead, and she was not in the
smallest degree my starting-point or example. Miss Birdseye was evolved
entirely from my moral consciousness, like every other person I have
ever drawn, and originated in my desire to make a figure who should
embody in a sympathetic, pathetic, picturesque, and at the same time
grotesque way, the humanitary and ci-devant transcendental tendencies
which I thought it highly probable I should be accused of treating in a
contemptuous manner in so far as they were otherwise represented in the
tale. I wished to make this figure a woman, because so it would be more
touching, and an old, weary, battered, and simple-minded woman because
that deepened the same effect. I elaborated her in my mind's eye--and
after I had got going reminded myself that my creation would perhaps be
identified with Miss Peabody--_that_ I freely admit. So I have in mind
the sense of being careful, at the same time that I didn't see what I
could do but go my way, according to my own fancy, and make my image as
living as I saw it. The one definite thing about which I had a scruple
was some touch about Miss Birdseye's spectacles--I remembered that Miss
Peabody's were always in the wrong place; but I didn't see, really, why
I should deprive myself of an effect (as regards this point) which is
common to a thousand old people. So I thought no more about Miss P. _at
all_, but simply strove to realize my vision. If I have made my old
woman _live_ it is my misfortune, and the thing is doubtless a
rendering, a vivid rendering, of my idea. If it is at the same time a
rendering of Miss P. I am absolutely irresponsible--and extremely sorry
for the accident. If there is any chance of its being represented to
_her_ that I have undertaken to reproduce her in a novel I will
immediately write to her, in the most respectful manner, to say that I
have done nothing of the kind, that an old survivor of the New England
Reform period was an indispensable personage in my story, that my
paucity of data and not my repletion is the faulty side of the whole
picture, that, as I went, I had no sight or thought of her, but only of
an imaginary figure which was much nearer to me, and that in short I
have the vanity to claim that Miss Birdseye is a creation. You may think
I protest too much: but I am alarmed by the sentence in your letter--"It
is really a pretty bad business," and haunted by the idea that this may
apply to some rumour you have heard of Miss Peabody's feeling
_atteinte_. I can imagine no other reason why you should call the
picture of Miss Birdseye a "bad business," or indeed any business at
all. I would write to Miss P. on this chance--only I don't like to
_assume_ that she feels touched, when it is possible that she may not,
and knows nothing about the matter. If you can ascertain whether or no
she does and will let me know, I will, should there be need or fitness,
immediately write to her. Miss Birdseye is a subordinate figure in the
_Bostonians_, and after appearing in the first and second numbers
vanishes till toward the end, where she re-enters, briefly, and
pathetically and honourably dies. But though subordinate, she is, I
think, the best figure in the book; she is treated with respect
throughout, and every virtue of heroism and disinterestedness is
attributed to her. She is represented as the embodiment of pure, the
purest philanthropy. The story is, I think, the best fiction I have
written, and I expected you, if you said anything about it, would
intimate that you thought as much--so that I find this charge on the
subject of Miss Peabody a very cold douche indeed....

Ever yours,
H. JAMES.




_To James Russell Lowell._

     Lowell was now leaving London after having held the post of
     American Minister there since 1880.


St. Alban's Cliff,
Bournemouth.

May 29th [1885].

My dear Lowell,

My hope of coming up to town again has been defeated, and it comes over
me that your departure is terribly near. Therefore I write you a line of
hearty and affectionate farewell--mitigated by the sense that after all
it is only for a few months that we are to lose you. I trust, serenely,
to your own conviction of this fact, but for extra safety just remark
that if you don't return to London next winter I shall hurl myself
across the ocean at you like a lasso. As I look back upon the years of
your mission my heart swells and almost breaks again (as it did when I
heard you were superseded) at the thought that anything so perfect
should be gratuitously destroyed. But there is a part of your function
which can go on again, indefinitely, whenever you take it up--and that,
I repeat, I hope you will do soon rather than late. I think with the
tenderest pleasure of the many fire-side talks I have had with you, from
the first--and with a pleasure dimmed with sadness of so many of our
more recent ones. You are tied to London now by innumerable cords and
fibres, and I should be glad to think that you ever felt me, ever so
lightly, pulling at one of them. It is a great disappointment to me not
to see you again, but I am kept here fast and shall not be in town till
the end of June. I give you my blessing and every good wish for a happy
voyage. I wish I could receive you over there--and assist at your
arrival and impressions--little as I want you to go back. Don't forget
that you have produced a relation between England and the U.S. which is
really a gain to civilization and that you must come back to look after
your work. You can't look after it there: that is the function of an
Englishman--and if _you_ do it there they will call you one. The only
way you can be a good American is to return to our dear old stupid,
satisfactory London, and to yours ever affectionately and faithfully,

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._

     To prevent confusion of names it should be mentioned that the
     "Alice" referred to at the end of this letter is H. J.'s
     sister-in-law, Mrs. William James. His sister, Miss Alice James,
     remained in England till her death six years later.


13 De Vere Mansions, W.
March 9th [1886].

My dear William,

Long before getting your most excellent letter of Feb. 21st I had been
pricked with shame and remorse at my long silence; you may imagine then
how this pang sharpened when, three or four days ago, that letter
arrived. There were all sorts of reasons for my silence which I won't
take up time now with narrating--further than to say that they were not
reasons of misfortune or discomfort--but only of
other-engagement-and-occupation pressure--connected with arrears of
writing, consumption of time in furnishing and preparing my new
habitation, and the constant old story of London interruptions and
distractions. Thank God I am out of them far more now than I have ever
been before--in my chaste and secluded Kensington quatrième. I moved in
here definitely only three days ago, and am still rather upside down.
The place is excellent in every respect, improves on acquaintance every
hour and is, in particular, flooded with light like a photographer's
studio. I commune with the unobstructed sky and have an immense
bird's-eye view of housetops and streets. My rooms are very pretty as
well as very convenient, and will be more so when little by little I
have got more things. When I have time I will make you a diagram, and
later, when the drawing-room (or library: meantime I have a smaller
sitting-room in order) is furnished (I have nothing for it yet), I shall
have the place photographed. I shall do far better work here than I have
ever done before.

Alice is going on the same very good way, and receiving visits almost
daily. A great many people come to see her; she is highly appreciated,
and might easily, if she were to stay here, getting sufficiently better
to exert herself more &c, become a great success and queen of society.
Her vigour of mind, decision of character &c, wax daily, and her
conversation is brilliant and sémillant. She could easily, if she were
to stay, beat the British female all round. She is also looking very
well.... The weather continues bitterly cold, and there will be no
question of her going out for a long time to come.

The two great public matters here have been the riot, and the
everlasting and most odious ---- scandal. (I mean, of course, putting
the all-overshadowing Irish question aside.) I was at Bournemouth
(seeing R. L. Stevenson) the day of the émeute, and lost the spectacle,
to my infinite chagrin. I should have seen it well from my balcony, as I
should have been at home when it passed, and it smashed the windows in
the houses (three doors from mine) on the corner of Bolton St. and
Piccadilly. Alice was all unconscious of it till the morrow, and was
not at all agitated. The wreck and ruin in Piccadilly and some other
places (I mean of windows) was, on my return from Bournemouth,
sufficiently startling, as was also the manner in which the carriages of
a number of ladies were stopped, and the occupants hustled, rifled,
slapped or kissed, as the case might be, and turned out. The real
unemployed, I believe, had very little share in all this: it was the
work of the great army of roughs and thieves, who seized, owing to the
very favourable nature of their opportunity, a day of licence. It is
difficult to know whether the real want of work is now, or not, so very
much greater than usual--in face of positive affirmations and negations;
there is, at any rate, immense destitution. Every one here is growing
poorer--from causes which, I fear, will continue. All the same, what
took place the other day is, I feel pretty sure, the worst that for a
long time to come, the British populace is likely to attempt.... I can't
talk about the Irish matter--partly because one is sick of it--partly
because I _know_ too little about it, and one is still more sick of all
the vain words on the subject, without knowledge or thought, that fill
the air here. I don't believe much in the Irish, and I believe still
less [in] (consider with less complacency) the disruption of the British
Empire, but I don't see how the management of their own affairs can be
kept away from them--or why it should. I can't but think that, as they
are a poor lot, with great intrinsic sources of weakness, their power to
injure and annoy England (if they were to get their own parliament)
would be considerably less than is assumed.

The "Bostonians" must be out, in America, by this time; I told them, of
course, to send you a copy. It appears to be having a goodish success
there. All your tidings about your own life, Bob, &c, were of the
deepest interest.... I wish I could assist at your researches and see
the children, and commune with Alice--to whom I send much brotherly
love.

Ever your
HENRY.




_To Charles Eliot Norton._

     Professor Norton had sent H. J. the first instalment of his edition
     of Carlyle's correspondence.


Milan, December 6th [1886].

My dear Charles,

I ought long ago to have thanked you for your very substantial present
of Carlyle--but I waited in the first place till I should have read the
book (which business was considerably delayed,) and then till I had
wound up a variety of little matters, mainly matters of writing which
pressed upon me in anticipation of my leaving England for two or three
months. Now when at last I seize the moment, I _have_ left England, but
you will be as glad of a letter from here as from out of the dense grey
medium in which we had been living for a month before I quitted London.
I came hither straight from Dover last night through the hideous but
convenient hole in the dear old St. Gotthard, and I have been strolling
about Milan all the morning, drinking in the delicious Italian sun,
which fortunately shines, and giving myself up to the sweet sense of
living once more--after an interval of several years--in the adorable
country it illumines. It is Sunday and all the world is in the streets
and squares, and the Italian type greets me in all its handsomeness and
friendliness, and also, I fear I must add, not a little in its
vulgarity. But its vulgarity is the exaggeration of a merit and not, as
in England and the U.S., of a defect. Churches and galleries have such a
fatal chill that being sore-throatish and neuralgic I have had to keep
out of them, but the Duomo lifts all its pinnacles and statues into the
far away light, and looks across at the other white needles and spires
of the Alps in the same bewildering cluster. I go to spend the remainder
of this month in Florence and afterwards to--I hope--take a month
between Rome, Naples and Venice--but it will be as it will turn out.
Once I am in Italy it is about the same to me to be in one place as in
another.

All this takes me away from Carlyle and from the Annandale view of life.
I read the two volumes with exceeding interest; for my admiration of
Carlyle as a letter writer is boundless, and it is curious to watch the
first step and gradual amplification of his afterwards extraordinary
style. Those addressed to his own family are most remarkable as
dedicated to a household of peasants, by one of themselves, and in short
for the _amateur_ of Carlyle the book has a high value. But I doubt
whether the general public will bite at it very eagerly. I don't know
why I allude to this, though--for the general public has small sense and
less taste, and its likes and dislikes, I think, must mostly make the
judicious grieve. You seem to me a most perfect and ideal editor--and it
is a great pleasure to me that so excellent and faultless a piece of
editorial work should proceed from our rough and ready country--but at
the same time your demolitions of the unspeakable Froude don't persuade
me that Carlyle was _amiable_. It seems to me he remains the most
disagreeable in character of men of genius of equal magnificence. In
these youthful letters it appears to me even striking how his
disagreeableness comes out more and more in proportion as his talent
develops. This doesn't prevent him, however, from being in my
opinion--and doubtless in yours--one of the very greatest--perhaps the
very greatest of letter writers; only when one thinks of the other most
distinguished masters of expression the image evoked has (though
sometimes it may be sad enough) a serenity, a general _pleasantness_.
When the vision of Carlyle comes to us there comes with it the idea of
harshness and discord. The difference between the man and the genius
seems to me, in other words, greater than in any other case--for if
Voltaire was a rascal he was eminently a social one--and Rousseau (to
think of a great intellectual swell who must have been odious) hadn't
anything like Carlyle's "parts." All the same, I shall devour the
volumes I am delighted to see you are still to publish.

I ought to have plenty of London news for you--but somehow I feel as if
I had not brought it to Italy with me. Much of it, in these days, is
such as there must be little profit in carrying about with one. The
subject of the moment, as I came away, was the hideous ---- divorce
case, which will besmirch exceedingly the already very damaged prestige
of the English upper class. The condition of that body seems to me to be
in many ways very much the same rotten and _collapsible_ one as that of
the French aristocracy before the revolution--minus cleverness and
conversation; or perhaps it's more like the heavy, congested and
depraved Roman world upon which the barbarians came down. In England the
Huns and Vandals will have to come _up_--from the black depths of the
(in the people) enormous misery, though I don't think the Attila is
quite yet found--in the person of Mr. Hyndman. At all events, much of
English life is grossly materialistic and wants blood-letting. I had not
been absent from London for a year before this--save for two or three
days at a time. I remained in town all summer and autumn--only paying an
occasional, or indeed a rather frequent, country visit--a business,
however, which I endeavour more and more to keep, if possible, within
the compass of _hours_. The gilded bondage of the country house becomes
onerous as one grows older, and then the waste of time in vain sitting
and strolling about is a gruesome thought in the face of what one still
wants to do with one's remnant of existence. I saw Matt Arnold the other
night, and he spoke very genially of you and of his visit to
Ashfield--very _affectionately_, too, of George Curtis--which I loudly
echoed. M. A. said of Stockbridge and the summer life thereabouts, etc.
(with his chin in the air)--"Yes, yes--it's a proof that it's attaching
that one thinks of it again--one thinks of it again." This was amiably
sublime and amiably characteristic.--I see Burne-Jones from time to
time, but not as often as I should like. I am always so afraid of
breaking in on his work. Whenever he is at home he is working and when
he isn't working he's not at home. When I _do_ see him, it is one of the
best human pleasures that London has for me. But I don't understand his
life--that is the manner and tenor of his production--a complete
_studio_ existence, with doors and windows closed, and no search for
impressions outside--no open air, no real daylight and no looking out
for it. The things he does in these conditions have exceeding
beauty--but they seem to me to grow colder and colder--pictured
abstractions, less and less observed. Such as he is, however, he is
certainly the most distinguished artistic figure among Englishmen
to-day--the only one who has escaped vulgarization and on whom claptrap
has no hold. Moreover he is, as you know, exquisite in mind and
talk--and we fraternize greatly....




_To Miss Grace Norton._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
July 23rd, 1887.

My dear Grace,

I am ashamed to find myself back in England without having fulfilled the
inward vow I took when I received your last good and generous
letter--that of writing to you before my long stay on the continent was
over. But I _almost_ don't fail of that vow--inasmuch as I returned only
day before yesterday. My eight months escape into the happy immunities
of foreign life is over and the stern realities of London surround me,
in the shape of stuffy midsummer heat (that of this metropolis has a
truly British ponderosity--it's as dull as an article in a Quarterly,)
smoke, circulars, invitations, _bills_, the one sauce that Talleyrand
commemorated, and reverberations of the grotesque Jubilee. On the other
hand my small house seems most pleasant and peculiar (in the sense of
being my own,) and my servants are as punctual as they are prim--which
is saying much. But I enjoyed my absence, and I shall endeavour to
repeat it every year, for the future, on a smaller scale; that is, to
leave London, not at the beginning of the winter but at the end, by the
mid-April, and take the period of the insufferable Season regularly in
Italy. It was a great satisfaction to me to find that I am as fond of
that dear country as I ever was--and that its infinite charm and
interest are one of the things in life to be most relied upon. I was
afraid that the dryness of age--which drains us of so many
sentiments--had reduced my old _tendresse_ to a mere memory. But no--it
is really so much in my pocket, as it were, to feel that Italy is always
there. It is rather rude, my dear Grace, to say all this to you--for
whom it is there to so little purpose. But if I should observe this
scruple about all the places that you don't go to, or are not in, when I
write to you, my writing would go very much on one leg. I was back again
in Venice--where I paid a second visit late in the season (from the
middle of May to July 1st)--when I got your last letter. I was staying
at the Palazzo Barbaro, with the Daniel Curtises--the happy owners,
to-day, of that magnificent house--a place of which the full charm only
sinks into your spirit as you go on living there, seeing it in all its
hours and phases. I went for ten days, and they clinging to me, I stayed
five weeks: the longest visit I ever paid a "private family." ... In the
interval between my two visits to Venice I took again some rooms at the
Villa Bricchieri at Bellosguardo--the one just below your old
Ombrellino--where I had stayed for three December weeks on my arrival in
Florence. The springtime there was enchanting, and you know what a thing
that incomparable view is to live with. I really _did_ live with it, and
rejoiced in it every minute, holding it to be (to my sensibilities)
positively the most beautiful and interesting in the world. Florence was
given over to fêtes during most of those weeks--the fêtes of the
completion of the façade of the Duomo--which by the way (the new façade)
isn't "half bad." It is of a very splendouriferous effect, and there is
doubtless too much of it. But it does great honour to the contemporary
(as well as to the departed) Italian--and I don't believe such work
could have been produced elsewhere than in that country of the delicate
hand and the insinuating chisel. I stepped down into the fêtes from my
hill top--and even put on a crimson _lucco_ and a beautiful black velvet
headgear and disported myself at the great _ballo storico_ that was
given at the Palazzo Vecchio to the King and Queen. This had the defect
of its class--a profusion of magnificent costumes but a want of
_entrain_; and the success of the whole episode was much more a certain
really splendid procession of the old time, with all the Strozzis,
Guicciardinis, Rucellais, etc., mounted on magnificent horses and
wearing admirable dresses with the childlike gallantry and glee with
which only Italians can wear them, riding through the brown old streets
and followed by an immense train of citizens all in the carefullest
quattro-cento garb. This was really a noble picture and testified to the
latent love of splendour which is still in those dear people and which
only asks for a favouring chance to shine out, even at the cost of
ruining them. Before leaving Italy I spent a week with Mrs. Kemble at
Lago Maggiore--she having dipped over there, in spite of torrid heat.
She is a very (or at least a partly) extinct volcano to-day, and very
easy and delightful to dwell with, in her aged resignation and
_adoucissements_. But she did suggest to me, on seeing her again after
so long an interval, that it is rather a melancholy mistake, in this
uncertain life of ours, to have founded oneself on so many rigidities
and rules--so many siftings and sortings. Mrs. Kemble is _toute d'une
pièce_, more than any one, probably, that ever lived; she moves in a
mass, and if she does so little as to button her glove it is the whole
of her "personality" that does it. Let us be flexible, dear Grace; let
us be flexible! and even if we don't reach the sun we shall at least
have been up in a balloon.--I left Stresa on the 15th of this month, had
a glorious day on the Simplon amid mountain streams and mountain
flowers, and came quickly home.... I shall be here for the rest of the
summer--save for little blotches of absence--and I look forward to some
quiet months of work. I am trying, not without success, to get out of
society--as hard as some people try to get in. I want to be dropped and
cut and consummately ignored. This only demands a little patience, and I
hope eventually to elbow my way down to the bottom of the wave--to
achieve an obscurity. This would sound fatuous if I didn't add that
success is easily within my grasp. I know it all--all that one sees by
"going out"--to-day, as if I had made it. But if I had, I would have
made it better! I think of you on your porch--amid all your creepers and
tendrils; and wherever you are, dear Grace, I am your very faithful and
much remembering friend,

HENRY JAMES.




_To Edmund Gosse._

     Stevenson and his family sailed for America a few days after the
     date of this letter. Mr. Gosse has described the episode in his
     recollections of R. L. S. (_Critical Kit-kats_). Stevenson's life
     in the South Seas began in the following year, and his friends in
     England saw him no more.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
August 17th [1887].

Dear Gosse,

I went to-day to R. L. S.'s ship, which is at the Albert Dock, about 20
minutes in the train from Fenchurch Street. Its sailing has been put off
till Monday forenoon, so there is more time to do something. I couldn't,
after all, get _on_ the ship--as she stood off from the dock, without a
convenient approach, and both the captain and the steward (whom I wanted
to see) were not there, as I was told by a man on the dock who was
seeing some things being put on by a crane in which I couldn't be
transferred. The appearance of the vessel was the reverse of attractive,
though she is rather large than small. I write to-night to Mrs.
Stevenson, to ask if they are really coming up to sail--that is if
nothing has interfered at the last moment. If they are, there is nothing
to be done to deter them, that I see. I shall ask her to _telegraph_ me
an answer. I shall feel that I must go again (to the ship), as I don't
very well see how things are to be sent there. I will telegraph you what
she telegraphs me and what I decide to do.

Ever yours,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     H. J.'s article on R. L. S. appeared in the _Century Magazine_,
     April, 1888, and was reprinted in _Partial Portraits_.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
October 30th, 1887.

My dear Louis,

It is really a delight to get your charming letter (from the
undecipherable lake) just this very blessed minute. Long alienation has
made my American geography vague, and not knowing _what_ your lake is I
know still less _where_ it is. Nevertheless I roughly suspect it of
being in the Adirondacks; if it isn't, may it excuse the injury. Let me
tell you, quickly and crudely, that I am quite exhilarated that you like
the Article. I thought--or rather I hoped--that you would, and yet I
feared you wouldn't--i.e. mightn't--and altogether I was not so
convinced but that your expression of pleasure is a reassurance to me as
well as a gratification. I felt, while I wrote, that you served me well;
you were really, my dear fellow, a capital subject--I will modestly
grant you that, though it takes the bloom from my merit. To be not only
witty one's self but the cause in others of a wit that is not at one's
expense--that is a rare and high character, and altogether yours. I
devoutly hope that it's in the November Century that the thing appears,
and also that it was not too apparent to you in it that I hadn't seen a
proof--a privation I detest. I wrote to you some three weeks or so
ago--c/o Scribners. Wondrous seems to me the fate that leads you to the
prospect of wintering at--well, wherever you are. The succession of
incidents and places in your career is ever romantic. May you find what
you need--white, sunny Winter hours, not too stove-heated nor too
pork-fed, with a crisp dry air and a frequent leisure and no desperation
of inanition. And may much good prose flow from it all. I wish I could
see you--in my mind's eye: but que dis-je? I do--and the minutest
particularities of your wooden bower rise before me. I see the
clapboards and the piazza and the door-step and the door-handle, and the
road in front and the yard behind. Don't yearn to extinction for the
trim little personality of Skerryvore. I have great satisfaction in
hearing (from Mrs. Procter, of course) that that sweet house is let--to
those Canadians. May they be punctual with their rent. Do tell your
wife, on her return from the wild West, that I _supplicate_ her to write
to me, with items, details, specifications, and insistences. I am now
collecting some papers into a volume; and the Article, par excellence,
in the midst. May the American air rest lightly on you, my dear friend:
I wish it were mine to turn it on!

Ever faithfully yours,
HENRY JAMES.

P.S. My love to your wife goes without saying--but I send a very
explicit friendliness to your mother. I hope she returns the liking of
America. And I bless the ticking Lloyd.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     Stevenson's letter (answered by the following) of admiration of
     _Roderick Hudson_ and _execration_ of _The Portrait of a Lady_ is
     included in the _Letters to his Family and Friends_, edited by Sir
     Sidney Colvin.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
December 5th [1887].

My dear Louis,

I could almost hate poor Roderick H. (in whom, at best, as in all my
past and shuffled off emanations and efforts, my interest is of the
slenderest,) for making you write so much more about him than about a
still more fascinating hero. If you had only given me a small instalment
of that romantic serial, The Mundane Situation of R. L. S.! My dear
fellow, you skip whole numbers at a time. Your correspondent wouldn't. I
am really delighted you can find something at this late day in that work
in which my diminutive muse first tried to elongate her little legs. It
is a book of considerable good faith, but I think of limited skill.
Besides, directly my productions are finished, or at least thrust out to
earn their living, they seem to _me_ dead. They dwindle when
weaned--removed from the parental breast, and only flourish, a little,
while imbibing the milk of my plastic care. None the less am I touched
by your excellent and friendly words. Perhaps I am touched even more by
those you dedicate to the less favoured _Portrait_. My dear Louis, I
don't think I follow you here--why does that work move you to such
scorn--since you can put up with Roderick, or with any of the others? As
they are, so it is, and as it is, so they are. Upon my word you are
unfair to it--and I scratch my head bewildered. 'Tis surely a graceful,
ingenious, elaborate work--with too many pages, but with (I think) an
interesting subject, and a good deal of life and style. There! _All_ my
works may be damnable--but I don't perceive the particular damnability
of that one. However I feel as if it were almost gross to defend
myself--for even your censure pleases and your restrictions refresh. I
have this very day received from Mr. Bain your _Memories and Portraits_,
and I lick my chops in advance. It is very delectable, I can see, and it
has the prettiest coat and face of any of your volumes.--London is
settling to its winter pace, and the cool rich fogs curtain us in. I see
Colvin once in a while _dans le monde_, which however I frequent less
and less. I miss you too sensibly. My love to your wife and mother--my
greeting to the brave Lloyd.

Ever yours very faithfully,
H. JAMES.

P.S. I am unspeakably vexed at the Century's long delay in printing my
paper on you--it is quite sickening. But I am helpless--and they tell me
it won't come out till _March_--d----n 'em all. I am also
sorry--very--not to have any other prose specimens of my own genius to
send you. I have really written a good deal lately--but the beastly
periodicals hold them back: I can't make out why. But I trust the dance
will begin before long, and that then you may glean some pleasure. I
pray you, do write something yourself for one who _knows_ and yet is
famished: for there isn't a morsel here that will keep one alive. I
won't question you--'twere vain--but I wish I knew more about you. I
want to _see_ you--where you live and _how_--and the complexion of your
days. But I don't know even the name of your habitat nor the date of
your letter: neither were on the page. I bless you all the same.




_To W. D. Howells._


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
January 2nd, 1888.

My dear Howells,

Your pretty read book (that is a misprint for _red_, but it looks well,
better than it deserves, so I let it stand,) the neat and attractive
volume, with its coquettish inscription over its mystifying date, came
in to me exactly as a new year's gift. I was delighted to get it, for I
had not perused it in the pages of Harper, for reasons that you will
understand--knowing as you must how little the habit of writing in the
serial form encourages one to read in that odious way, which so many
simple folk, thank heaven, think the best. I was on the point of getting
_April Hopes_ to add to the brave array of its predecessors (mine by
purchase, almost all of them,) when your graceful act saved me the
almost equally graceful sacrifice. I can make out why you are at Buffalo
almost as little as I believe that you believe that I have "long
forgotten" you. The intimation is worthy of the most tortuous feminine
mind that you have represented--say this wondrous lady, with the
daughter, in the very first pages of April Hopes, with whom I shall make
immediate and marvelling acquaintance. Your literary prowess takes my
breath away--you write so much and so well. I seem to myself a small
brown snail crawling after a glossy antelope. Let me hope that you
_enjoy_ your work as much as you ought to--that the grind isn't greater
than the inevitable (from the moment one really tries to _do_ anything).
Certainly one would never guess it, from your abounding page. How much I
wish I could keep this lovely new year by a long personal talk with you.
I am troubled about many things, about many of which you could give me,
I think (or rather I am sure,) advice and direction. I have entered
upon evil days--but this is for your most private ear. It sounds
portentous, but it only means that I am still staggering a good deal
under the mysterious and (to me) inexplicable injury
wrought--apparently--upon my situation by my two last novels, the
_Bostonians_ and the _Princess_, from which I expected so much and
derived so little. They have reduced the desire, and the demand, for my
productions to zero--as I judge from the fact that though I have for a
good while past been writing a number of good short things, I remain
irremediably unpublished. Editors keep them back, for months and years,
as if they were ashamed of them, and I am condemned apparently to
eternal silence. You must be so widely versed in all the reasons of
things (of this sort, to-day) in the U.S. that if I could discourse with
you awhile by the fireside I should endeavour to draw from you some
secret to break the spell. However, I don't despair, for I think I am
now really in better form than I have ever been in my life, and I
propose yet to do many things. Very likely too, some day, all my buried
prose will kick off its various tombstones at once. Therefore don't
betray me till I myself have given up. That won't be for a long time
yet. If we could have that rich conversation I should speak to you too
of your monthly polemics in _Harper_ and tell you (I think I should go
as far as that) of certain parts of the business in which I am less with
you than in others. It seems to me that on occasions you mix things up
that don't go together, sometimes make mistakes of proportion, and in
general incline to insist more upon the restrictions and limitations,
the _a priori_ formulas and interdictions, of our common art, than upon
that priceless freedom which is to me the thing that makes it worth
practising. But at this distance, my dear Howells, such things are too
delicate and complicated--they won't stand so long a journey. Therefore
I won't attempt them--but only say how much I am struck with your
energy, ingenuity, and courage, and your delightful interest in the
charming questions. I don't care how much you dispute about them if you
will only remember that a grain of example is worth a ton of precept,
and that with the imbecility of babyish critics the serious writer need
absolutely not concern himself. I am surprised, sometimes, at the things
you notice and seem to care about. One should move in a diviner air....
I even confess that since the _Bostonians_, I find myself holding the
"critical world" at large in a singular contempt. I go so far as to
think that the literary sense is a distinctly waning quality. I can
speak of your wife and children only interrogatively--which will tell
you little--and me, I fear, less. But let me at least be affirmative to
the extent of wishing them all, very affectionately, and to Mrs. H. in
particular, the happiest New Year. Go on, my dear Howells, and send me
your books always--as I _think_ I send you mine. Continue to write only
as your admirable ability moves you and believe me

Ever faithfully yours,
HENRY JAMES.




_To Robert Louis Stevenson._

     The novel, just begun, was _The Tragic Muse_.


34 De Vere Gardens, W.
July 31st [1888].

My dear Louis,

You are too far away--you are too absent--too invisible, inaudible,
inconceivable. Life is too short a business and friendship too delicate
a matter for such tricks--for cutting great gory masses out of 'em by
the year at a time. Therefore come back. Hang it all--sink it all and
come back. A little more and I shall cease to believe in you: I don't
mean (in the usual implied phrase) in your veracity, but literally and
more fatally in your relevancy--your objective reality. You have become
a beautiful myth--a kind of unnatural uncomfortable unburied _mort_. You
put forth a beautiful monthly voice, with such happy notes in it--but it
comes from too far away, from the other side of the globe, while I
vaguely know that you are crawling like a fly on the nether surface of
my chair. Your adventures, no doubt, are wonderful; but I don't
successfully evoke them, understand them, believe in them. I do in those
you write, heaven knows--but I don't in those you perform, though the
latter, I know, are to lead to new revelations of the former and your
capacity for them is certainly wonderful enough. This is a selfish
personal cry: I wish you back; for literature is lonely and Bournemouth
is barren without you. Your place in my affection has not been usurped
by another--for there is not the least little scrap of another to usurp
it. If there were I would perversely try to care for him. But there
isn't--I repeat, and I literally care for nothing but your return. I
haven't even your novel to stay my stomach withal. The wan wet months
elapse and I see no sign of it. The beautiful portrait of your wife
shimmers at me from my chimney-piece--brought some months ago by the
natural McClure--but seems to refer to one as dim and distant and
delightful as a "toast" of the last century. I wish I could make you
homesick--I wish I could spoil your fun. It is a very featureless time.
The summer is rank with rheumatism--a dark, drowned, unprecedented
season. The town is empty but I am not going away. I have no money, but
I have a little work. I have lately written several short fictions--but
you may not see them unless you come home. I have just begun a novel
which is to run through the _Atlantic_ from January 1st and which I
aspire to finish by the end of this year. In reality I suppose I shall
not be fully delivered of it before the middle of next. After that, with
God's help, I propose, for a longish period, to do nothing but short
lengths. I want to leave a multitude of pictures of my time, projecting
my small circular frame upon as many different spots as possible and
going in for number as well as quality, so that the number may
constitute a total having a certain value as observation and testimony.
But there isn't so much as a creature here even to whisper such an
intention to. Nothing lifts its hand in these islands save blackguard
party politics. Criticism is of an abject density and puerility--it
doesn't exist--it writes the intellect of our race too low. Lang, in the
D.N., every morning, and I believe in a hundred other places, uses his
beautiful thin facility to write everything down to the lowest level of
Philistine twaddle--the view of the old lady round the corner or the
clever person at the dinner party. The incorporated society of authors
(I belong to it, and so do you, I think, but I don't know what it is)
gave a dinner the other night to American literati to thank them for
praying for international copyright. I carefully forbore to go, thinking
the gratulation premature, and I see by this morning's _Times_ that the
banquetted boon is further off than ever. Edmund Gosse has sent me his
clever little life of Congreve, just out, and I have read it--but it
isn't so good as his Raleigh. But no more was the insufferable
subject.... Come, my dear Louis, grow not too thin. I can't question
you--because, as I say, I don't conjure you up. You have killed the
imagination in me--that part of it which formed your element and in
which you sat vivid and near. Your wife and Mother and Mr. Lloyd suffer
also--I must confess it--by this failure of breath, of faith. Of course
I have your letter--from Manasquan (is that the idiotic name?) of
the--ingenuous me, to think there was a date! It was terribly
impersonal--it did me little good. A little more and I shan't believe in
you enough to bless you. Take this, therefore, as your last chance. I
follow all with an aching wing, an inadequate geography and an
ineradicable hope. Ever, my dear Louis, yours, to the last snub--

HENRY JAMES.




_To William James._


Hôtel de l'Ecu, Geneva.
October 29th, 1888.

My dear William,

Your beautiful and delightful letter of the 14th, from your country
home, descended upon me two days ago, and after penetrating myself with
it for 24 hours I sent it back to England, to Alice, on whom it will
confer equal beatitude: not only because so copious, but because so
"cheerful in tone" and appearing to show that the essentials of health
and happiness are with you. I wish to delay no hour longer to write to
you, though I am at this moment rather exhausted with the effort of a
long letter, completed five minutes since, to Louis Stevenson, in answer
to one I lately received from his wife, from some undecipherable
cannibal-island in the Pacific. They are such far-away, fantastic,
bewildering people that there is a certain fatigue in the achievement of
putting one's self in relation with them. I may mention in this
connection that I have had in my hands the earlier sheets of the _Master
of Ballantrae_, the new novel he is about to contribute to Scribner, and
have been reading them with breathless admiration. They are wonderfully
fine and perfect--he is a rare, delightful genius.

I am sitting in our old family _salon_ in this place, and have sat here
much of the time for the last fortnight in sociable converse with family
ghosts--Father and Mother and Aunt Kate and our juvenile selves. I
became conscious, suddenly, about Oct. 10th, that I wanted very much to
get away from the stale dingy London, which I had not quitted, to speak
of, for 15 months, and notably not all summer--a detestable summer in
England, of wet and cold. Alice, whom I went to see, on arriving at this
conclusion, assured me she could perfectly dispense for a few weeks with
my presence on English soil; so I came straight here, where I have a
sufficient, though not importunate sense of being in a foreign country,
with a desired quietness for getting on with work. I have had 16 days of
extraordinarily beautiful weather, full of autumn colour as vivid as
yours at Chocorua, and with the Mt. Blanc range, perpetually visible,
literally hanging, day after day, over the blue lake. I have treated
myself, as I say, to the apartments, or a portion of them, in which we
spent the winter of '59-'60, and in which nothing is changed save that
the hotel seems to have gone down in the world a little, before the
multiplication of rivals--a descent, however, which has the _agrément_
of unimpaired cleanliness and applies apparently to the prices as well.
It is very good and not at all dear. Geneva seems both duller and
smarter--a good deal bigger, yet emptier too. The Academy is now the
University--a large, winged building in the old public garden below the
Treille. But all the old smells and tastes are here, and the sensation
is pleasant. I expect in three or four days to go to Paris for about
three weeks--and back to London after that. I shall be very busy for the
next three or four months with the long thing I am doing for the
_Atlantic_ and which is to run no less than 15--though in shorter
instalments than my previous fictions; so that I have no time for wanton
travelling. But I enjoy the easier, lighter feeling of being out of
England. I suppose if one lived in one of these countries one would take
its problems to one's self, also, or be oppressed and darkened by
them--even as I am, more or less, by those which hang over me in London.
But as it is, the Continent gives one a refreshing sense of getting
_away_--away from Whitechapel and Parnell and a hundred other constantly
thickening heavinesses.... It is always a great misfortune, I think,
when one has reached a certain age, that if one is living in a country
not one's own and one is of anything of an ironic or critical
disposition, one mistakes the inevitable reflections and criticisms that
one makes, more and more as one grows older, upon life and human nature
etc., for a judgment of that particular country, its natives,
peculiarities, etc., to which, really, one has grown exceedingly
accustomed. For myself, at any rate, I am deadly weary of the whole
"international" state of mind--so that I _ache_, at times, with fatigue
at the way it is constantly forced upon me as a sort of virtue or
obligation. I can't look at the English-American world, or feel about
them, any more, save as a big Anglo-Saxon total, destined to such an
amount of melting together that an insistence on their differences
becomes more and more idle and pedantic; and that melting together will
come the faster the more one takes it for granted and treats the life of
the two countries as continuous or more or less convertible, or at any
rate as simply different chapters of the same general subject.
Literature, fiction in particular, affords a magnificent arm for such
taking for granted, and one may so do an excellent work with it. I have
not the least hesitation in saying that I aspire to write in such a way
that it would be impossible to an outsider to say whether I am at a
given moment an American writing about England or an Englishman writing
about America (dealing as I do with both countries,) and so far from
being ashamed of such an ambiguity I should be exceedingly proud of it,
for it would be highly civilized. You are right in surmising that it
must often be a grief to me not to get more time for reading--though not
in supposing that I am "hollowed out inside" by the limitations my
existence has too obstinately attached to that exercise, combined with
the fact that I produce a great deal. At times I do read almost as much
as my wretched little _stomach_ for it literally will allow, and on the
whole I get much more time for it as the months and years go by. I
touched bottom, in the way of missing time, during the first half of my
long residence in London--and traversed then a sandy desert, in that
respect--where, however, I took on board such an amount of human and
social information that if the same necessary alternatives were
presented to me again I should make the same choice. One can read when
one is middle-aged or old; but one can mingle in the world with fresh
perceptions only when one is young. The great thing is to be _saturated_
with something--that is, in one way or another, with life; and I chose
the form of my saturation. Moreover you exaggerate the degree to which
my writing takes it out of my mind, for I try to spend only the interest
of my capital.

I haven't told you how I found Alice when I last saw her. She is now in
very good form--still going out, I hear from her, in the mild moments,
and feeling very easy and even jolly about her Leamington winter. My
being away is a sign of her really good symptoms. She was _wüthend_
after the London police, in connection with the Whitechapel murders, to
a degree that almost constituted robust health. I have seen a great many
(that is, more than usual) Frenchmen in London this year: they bring me
notes of introduction--and the other day, the night before coming away,
I entertained at dinner (at a club,) the French Ambassador at Madrid
(Paul Cambon), Xavier Charmes of the French Foreign Office, G. du
Maurier, and the wonderful little Jusserand, the chargé d'affaires in
London, who is a great friend of mine, and to oblige and relieve whom it
was that I invited the two other diplomatists, his friends, whom he had
rather helplessly on his hands. THERE is the _real_ difference--a gulf
from the English (or the American) to the Frenchman, and vice versâ
(still more); and not from the Englishman to the American. The Frenchmen
I see all seem to me wonderful the first time--but not so much, at all,
the second.--But I must finish this without having touched any of the
sympathetic things I meant to say to you about your place, your work on
it, Alice's prowesses as a country lady, the children's vie champêtre,
etc. Aunt Kate, after her visit to you, praised all these things to us
with profusion and evident sincerity. I wish I could see them--but the
day seems far.--I haven't lain on the ground for so many years that I
feel as if I had spent them up in a balloon. Next summer I shall come
here--I mean to Switzerland, for which my taste has revived. I am full
of gratulation on your enlarged classes, chances of reading, etc., and
on your prospect of keeping the invalid child this winter. Give my
tender love to Alice. You are entering the period of keen suspense about
Cleveland, and I share it even here. I have lately begun to receive and
read the _Nation_ after a long interval--and it seems to me very rough.
Was it _ever_ so?... Ever your affectionate

HENRY JAMES.